hi my name is Mohamad ani and i'm super
excited to be your instructor in this
three hour course you're going to learn
everything you need to get started with
SQL or sequel first so I'm gonna give
you a three minute introduction to SQL
then we're going to install the
necessary tools and write our first SQL
query this course is ideal for anyone
who wants to learn SQL from scratch but
also anyone with some basic knowledge
who wants to fill in the missing gaps by
the end of this course you'll be able to
retrieve insert update and delete data
in databases will talk about tables
relationships different types of joins
sub queries regular expressions are much
much more these are the essential
concepts that every software developer
or data scientist must know this SQL
force is packed with tons of exercises
that help you both learn and remember
the SQL syntax also there's a table of
content below this video so you can
quickly jump to specific tutorials now
let's jump in and get started let's
start the course with a quick overview
of databases what they are and how we
use them a database is a collection of
data stored in a format that can easily
be accessed in order to manage our
databases we use a software application
called
database management system or DBMS we
connect to a DBMS and give it
instructions for querying or modifying
data the DBMS will execute our
instructions and send results back now
we have several database management
systems out there and these are
classified into two categories
relational and non-relational also
called no sequel in relational databases
we store data in tables that are linked
to each other using relationships that's
why we call this databases relational
databases each table stores data about a
specific type of object like customer
product order and so on SQL or sequel is
the language that we use to work with
these relational database management
systems it looks like this we use SQL to
query or modify our data in this course
we are going to learn everything about
this powerful language
now there are many different relational
database management systems out there
some of the most popular ones are MySQL
sequel server by Microsoft and Oracle
but of course there are plenty more each
database management system has a
different flavor of SQL but all these
implementations are very similar and are
based on the standard SQL specification
so most of the SQL code that you will
learn in this course will work with any
database management system in this
course we'll be using MySQL which is the
most popular open source database in the
world right now back to this diagram
what about non-relational databases in
non-relational databases we don't have
tables or relationships these databases
are very different from relational
databases but that's a topic for an
entirely different course what you need
to know is that non relational database
management systems don't understand
SQL they have their own query language
so we use SQL to work with relational
database management systems now Before
we jump in and install MySQL let me
clarify something quickly as you talk to
different people
you'll hear two different pronunciations
of SQL sequel or SQL what is the correct
way well it depends on who you ask
and of course everybody thinks their way
of pronouncing this word is the right
way but here's a little history about
this language SQL was originally
developed at IBM in the 70s and back
then it was initially called sequel
short for structured English query
language but they changed the acronym to
SQL because sequel was the trademark of
an airplane company so to this date
there has been an argument about what is
the right way to pronounce this language
generally speaking people in non-english
speaking countries
call it SQL are used to calling it
sequel because it's shorter and sweeter
than SQL but if you prefer to call it
SQL as total fine with me I'm not gonna
get mad at you so that's the history
behind this language but what about
MySQL as a software product developers
of this product prefer to call it MySQL
rather than my sequel but they don't
mind if we call it my sequel in this
course I'll be teaching you sequel with
MySQL
hey guys Marsh here I just wanted to let
you know that you really don't have to
memorize anything in this course because
I have created a complete cheat sheet
with summary notes for you you can find
it below this video in the description
box so I have done my best to create the
best possible most comprehensive sequel
course for you and I would really
appreciate it if you support my hard
work by liking and sharing this video
thank you so much now let's continue in
this tutorial I'm going to show you how
to install MySQL on your computer now
here I'm using a Mac so first I will
show you how to install MySQL on a Mac
computer and then I will show you how to
install it on windows so if you're a
Windows user feel free to skip this
tutorial now open up your browser and
head over to MySQL calm then go to the
downloads page and scroll down to the
bottom here you should see my SQL
community edition this is absolutely
free and we gonna use that throughout
this course so let's go ahead with that
now on this page click on MySQL
community server and then on this page
you should see available releases for
Mac OS so in this list download the
first item which is a dmg archive
alright now on the next page click on no
thanks just start my download alright as
you can see you are getting a dmg file
which is basically a set of wizard all
right now the dmg is downloaded so let's
open it and then double click on this
package this will launch an installation
wizard which is pretty easy to use so
simply click on continue and again and
again I agree with the license agreement
and install MySQL it's gonna ask for
your password this is the password that
you used to log in to your computer so
let's put that here alright now here we
need to set a password for the root or
the admin user so click Next and in this
box type a complex password
right now let's finish the installation
and into your computer's password one
more time and we're done that was super
easy and sweet all right we installed
MySQL community server now we need a
graphical tool to connect to the server
and manage our databases so back to the
downloads page one more time scroll to
the bottom and go to MySQL Community
Edition and on this page somewhere you
should see my SQL work bench this is a
graphical tool that we used to connect
to our database server so let's go ahead
and download this as well now once again
on this page we need to download a dmg
archive so download and again we have to
say no we don't want to log in or sign
up so let's just go ahead and download
the dmg and then open it all right
you're gonna see something like this so
simply drag this MySQL workbench and
drop it onto the Applications folder so
let's go ahead with that now it's going
to copy this into the Applications
folder beautiful so we're done with the
installation that was super easy now
press command on space and search for
MySQL workbench there you go let's open
it now the first time we get this
message because this is our application
that we have downloaded from the
internet so we need to tell Mac that we
trust this let's go ahead with that
so this is MySQL workbench now by
default you should see a connection here
if you don't see that you need to create
it let me show you how to do that so for
this demo I'm gonna right-click this and
delete this connection all right now
let's create a connection from scratch
so click on this plus icon on this page
give this connection a name let's say
local instance now the connection method
that we're gonna use is tcp/ip which is
set by default the host name is
127.0.0.1
point one which is the address of the
local machine and the port is three
three zero six this is the default port
for my SQL Server that is the username
of the admin now we need to enter the
password this is the password that we
set during the installation
so click on store in keychain and in
this box type the password for a MySQL
server alright and finally let's test
the connection okay we successfully
connected to MySQL server on the local
machine beautiful let's click OK and
here we have a connection on the home
page of MySQL workbench every time we
open MySQL workbench we use this
connection to connect to our local
server alright we're done with the
installation of MySQL on a Mac next I
will talk about installing MySQL on a
Windows computer so feel free to skip
that tutorial
in this tutorial I'm gonna show you how
to install MySQL on Windows so open up
your browser and head over to MySQL comm
then go to the downloads page now here
scroll down to the bottom we're gonna
use MySQL community edition which is
absolutely free so let's go with this
now select MySQL community server
and then scroll down so here you should
see something like this
my SQL installer for Windows this is the
recommended method for installing MySQL
on Windows so click on this alright on
the next page scroll down and
download the first installer here on the
next page scroll down and click on no
thanks just start my download otherwise
you have to create an account and login
which is unnecessary for following this
course so let's go with this and save
this file to a computer and then run it
all right we're gonna use this setup
wizard to install MySQL on our computer
this is very easy all you have to do is
to click Next but there are a couple of
places where you need to enter a
password let me show you so on the first
page for the setup type we're gonna use
the developer default setup go to the
next page now here we're getting a
little warning because this installation
wizard wants to install the connector
for python 3.7 but I don't have python
on this machine so that's why I'm
getting this warning now on your machine
you might or you might not get this
error it doesn't really matter just
click Next and one more time so here are
the products are gonna get installed the
first one is MySQL server the second one
is MySQL workbench this is the graphical
tool that we use to connect to our
database server and manage our databases
you're gonna see that soon so click on
execute now this is gonna take about
five to ten minutes so I'm going to
pause the recording
all right all the products are installed
beautiful let's go to the next page and
again here on the group replication page
also click on next and the next page
which is about networking leave all the
default settings so let's go to the next
page now we should set a password for
the root or the admin user so click on
next and in this box type a password for
the admin user alright and then let's go
to the next page once again leave all
the default settings and click on next
and execute one more time
all right and now let's finish the
installation once again we have to click
on next and then finish one more time
there are so many steps now here's the
page where you need to enter the admin
password so the page is called connect
to server you can see the user name is
root which represents the admin user so
in this box enter the password that you
said earlier then click on check ok
connection was successful beautiful
let's go to the next page and click on
execute and finally finish there you go
we have one more step next now finally
after all these steps the installation
is complete now this is gonna start
MySQL workbench which is the graphical
tool we used to manage our databases and
run sequel queries so click on finish so
now we have a command prompt window
where we can type instructions to talk
to our MySQL server we don't really need
this so close it and here's MySQL
workbench now the first time you open
this page by default you should see a
connection here if you don't see it
click on this plus icon on this page
give this connection and name let's say
local instance now leave all the
settings to their default value but here
for the password click on store involved
and in this box type the password that
you set for the admin user so I'm gonna
put that here
ok now click on test connection alright
it's successfully connected to the MySQL
server on this computer
alright then click on OK now we click on
this connection to connect to our
database server alright so here is the
interface that you'll be using
throughout this course on the left side
we have the Navigator panel in the
middle we have the query editor which we
can resize this is where we're gonna
write our sequel queries and on the
right side we have sequel editions so
we're done with the installation of
MySQL on our
next I'm gonna show you how to create
the databases for this course in this
tutorial I'm gonna show you how to
create the databases for this course so
here I've got my SQL work bench open let
me quickly give you an overview of this
interface because the first time you
open it it might appear a little bit
intimidating but actually it's not that
difficult so here on the top we've got
this toolbar with these buttons for
creating a new tab for writing stick
well code as well as opening a sequel
file and next to that we've got a bunch
of buttons for creating a database
creating new tables and so on on the
left side we've got the Navigator panel
with two tabs administration and schemas
we use the administration tab to do
administrative work such as starting or
stopping our server importing or
exporting data and so on this schemas
tab shows that databases that we have in
the current database server so currently
we only have one database that is sis
and this is the database that MySQL uses
internally to do its work now in the
middle we've got this query editor
window this is where we write our sequel
code so we'll be spending most of our
time in this course in this window and
on the right side we've got another
panel with two tabs context help and
snippets the chances are at this
interface might look slightly different
on Windows but what I'm showing you here
is almost identical with what we have on
Windows so don't get hung up if it looks
slightly different on your machine it
doesn't really matter now up here we've
got these buttons for showing or hiding
these panels so to clean this interface
I'm gonna hide this panel on the right
side as well as the panel on the bottom
that is better now to create the
databases for this course download the
zip file I've attached below this video
when you extract the zip file you're
gonna see a bunch of sequel files like
this so the main one that you will be
using in this tutorial is called create
databases dot sequel so this file
contains all the sequel code to create
all the databases that we need in this
course now we also have individual files
for creating individual databases I just
added
files in case you need to recreate one
of these databases in the future but for
now don't worry about them now back to
MySQL workbench let's open the main
sequel file that is create databases so
this is an example of sequel code that
this may look complex at the beginning
but trust me as you go through the
course you're gonna understand exactly
how everything works here you're gonna
be able to write sequel code like this
so we want to execute this to create all
the databases for this course to do that
we click on this icon this yellow
Thunder icon that we have on this
toolbar here this will execute either
the selection or the entire code if
there is nothing selected for example if
I select this line here and click on
this icon this will execute only this
line in this case we want to execute the
entire code so we shouldn't select
anything and now let's execute this
beautiful so here down the bottom we
have this panel called the output window
that shows all the operations performed
in our database server so we can check
to see if all the operations completed
successfully or something went wrong as
you can see we've got is green ticks
next to each operation beautiful so I'm
going to close this panel that's better
now on the left side in the schemas tab
currently we don't see the new databases
so we'll have to refresh this view
beautiful so we've got all these
databases that are prefixed with SQL or
sequel I decided to prefix them with
sequel so we know that these are the
databases for this course they don't
accidentally clash with another database
with the same name on your database
server now at the time of recording this
video there are only four databases here
but as we go through the course I'm
gonna update the script for creating the
databases so when you watch this course
chances are you're gonna see more
databases here don't worry about a
difference now as an example let's
explore one of this databases and by the
way we don't need this tab anymore so
let's close it that's better
let's expand the sequel store database
now in every database we have these
objects we have tables this is where we
store our data we
views which are kind of like virtual
tables so we can combine data from
multiple tables and put them in a view
and this is especially powerful for
creating reports you're going to learn
about them in the future we also have
stored procedures and functions and
these are little programs that we store
inside of our database for querying data
for example we can have a stored
procedure for getting all the customers
in a given City so we call that
procedure and say hey give me all the
customers in San Francisco and this will
return all the customers in San
Francisco okay now let's expand the
tables so here are the tables in this
database we have customers we have
orders products shippers and so on now
select this customers table whenever you
hover your mouse over this item you
should see these three icons on the
right side click on the rightmost icon
that looks like a table with a Thunder
with this we can see all the data in
this table
so this is our customers table in this
table we have these columns like
customer ID which we used to uniquely
identify customers we also have first
name last name birthdate phone address
and so on so these are the columns in
this table and every row is called a
record so every row represents one
customer and these are the pieces of
information we know about each customer
now let's look at another table let's
open the orders table in this table we
have these columns like order ID
customer ID order date status and so on
what is this customer ID here we use
this column to identify who has placed
each order now what is interesting here
is that you're referring to this
customers using their customer ID which
uniquely identifies them in other words
if John Smith has placed on order we
don't store John Smith here the only
store John's customer ID why is that
here's the reason it is possible that
John Smith might have placed multiple
orders in our system but every time John
places an order we need to look up his
address and phone to ship his
order now it is possible that some of
this information might change in the
future John might move to a new place or
change his phone number
he might even change his name if you
repeat all that information next to each
order then we'll have to come back and
make changes in multiple places in
contrast with this design we only store
the idea of John here so anytime we want
to change any information about John
instead of changing that here we go back
to our customers table so let's look at
the customer with ideas six that is
actually called ELCA so here are all the
information about Elka this is her phone
number this is her address and by the
way this is all dummy data that I
created using a tool so if any
information about Elka changes in the
future this is the only place that we
need to modify so this is how these
databases work we refer to this
databases as relational databases that
basically means in this kind of
databases we have multiple tables that
are related to each other using a
relationship so internally there is a
relationship between the customers table
and the orders table so the customer ID
column and the customers table is
related or linked or associated with the
customer ID column in the orders table
here's the orders table and here we have
the customer ID column so this was a
brief introduction to relational
databases you learn about databases
tables columns rows and relationships in
the next section I'm gonna show you how
to retrieve data from a single table in
this database but before going any
further as an exercise I want you to
explore the invoicing database look at
all the tables look at all the data to
get an idea of the kind of data we have
in this database you're gonna use this
database a lot in the future so spend a
couple of minutes to explore this
database
in this tutorial I'm going to show you
how to retrieve data from a single table
now look at the Navigator panel
currently none of our databases is
displayed in bold that means none of
this databases is selected for querying
so the first step to write a query to
get data from a database is to select a
database the query that will write will
be executed against that database in
this demo we're gonna use this sequel
store database so we type out use sequel
on the line store now use is a keyword
in the sequel language and that's the
reason is displayed in blue now sequel
is not a case-sensitive language and
that means we can use uppercase or
lowercase characters it doesn't really
matter but as a best practice we should
capitalize the sequel keywords and use
lowercase characters for anything else
so now let's go ahead and execute this
claim all right look the sequel store
database is now displayed in bold now in
MySQL workbench we can also select a
database by double clicking that so now
I double click sequel invoicing and it's
the current database now if we run this
query again the sequel store database
becomes selected all right now let's
write our first query to retrieve all
the customers in this database so after
the use statement we're gonna use the
Select statement here's the basic syntax
or basic structure of the Select
statement we type out select in front of
that we specified the columns that we
want to retrieve for example we can
retrieve the customer ID column as well
as the first name column or we can
retrieve all columns using an asterisk
now after that we use the fron clause
and this is where we specify the table
that we want to query in this case the
customers table so this is the simplest
query to select all the customers in a
given table now whenever you have
multiple sequel statements you need to
terminate each statement using a
semicolon so look we have a red
underline here that indicates an error
if you hover your mouse here you can see
this tooltip saying select is not valid
at the
position because we didn't terminate the
first statement with a semicolon
okay now let's execute this query one
more time once again we can click on
this button here or we can use a
shortcut so look at the query menu on
the top the first item is execute now
here's the shortcut for this command on
Mac it's shift command and enter on
Windows it's gonna be different honestly
I'm not sure so whatever it is use that
so I'm gonna press shift command and
enter and here are all the customers and
it's table so this select statement has
two clauses the Select Clause and the
from clause but there are other clauses
that we can use to filter and sort data
for example we can use the where Clause
to filter the result and get the
customer with ID 1 so we can write an
expression like this where customer
underlined ID equals 1 now when we
execute this query will only get the
customer with ID 1 so this is the where
clause we can also sort the data
so after where we use the order by
clause and here we specify the columns
that we want to sort the result on let's
say we want to sort this customers by
their first name so we type out first
underline name that is the name of one
of the columns in this table right now
if we execute this query this order by
it doesn't really have any impact
because we only get one record in the
result
so let me temporarily take out the where
clause to do that we can put two hyphens
in front of this line now this line is
treated as a comment which means the
sequel engine is not gonna execute this
okay
so let's execute this query one more
time now all the customers that we get
are sorted based on their first name so
that's the basic idea now over the next
few tutorials you're gonna learn more
about each of these classes in detail
but what you need to take away in this
tutorial is that these three clauses
from where an order by are optional as
you can see in this example I'm not
using the where clause we can
so comment out the order by Clause we
can also comment out the front clause so
instead of selecting all the columns in
a given table we can select some values
like 1 & 2 now if you execute this query
one more time in the result we get
something like this two columns called 1
& 2 & in these columns we have these
values so all these clauses are optional
but in the real world we quite often use
all of them but what you need to
understand here is that the order of
this clause is matters so we always have
select first then we have from then
where and finally order by we cannot
change the order of these classes
otherwise we get a syntax error which
basically means the syntax or the
grammar or the structure of our sequel
statement is incorrect so it can't be
executed and one last thing before we
finish this tutorial in this example you
can see I've listed all these clauses on
a new line but technically you don't
have to do this because line breaks
white spaces and tabs are ignored when
executing sequel statements so we could
come back here and put from in front of
select so select star from customers all
in one line and that's perfectly fine
for simple queries but as your queries
get more complex it's better to put each
Clause on a new line so that's all for
this tutorial
in the next tutorial we'll explore the
seller clause in detail in this tutorial
we're gonna look at the Select Clause in
detail so since our current database is
seacoast or to clean things up I'm gonna
remove the first statement you don't
really need it now also I'm gonna delete
these two comments we just want to focus
on the Select clause alright so what can
we do with the Select clause well in the
last tutorial you'll learn that if we
use an asterisk this will return all the
columns alternatively we can specify the
columns that we want and this is helpful
in situations where you have a big table
with so many columns and perhaps
millions of Records if you want to bring
back all that data that's gonna put a
lot of pressure on the database server
in this case MySQL as well as the
network so that's when we explicit
specify the columns that we want to get
let's say we want to get the first name
and last name columns execute the query
as you can see we only get these two
columns and they're in the same order
you specified here so if we change the
order and put the last name first and
execute the query again now you can see
the last name column comes first now
let's add a new column to the end let's
get the point for each customer as well
we run the query so these are the points
for each customer which are calculated
based on their shopping now let's say we
want to get these points and put them in
a mathematical formula to calculate the
discount that we can give to each
customer so here we can use an
arithmetic expression let's say points
plus 10 this is an arithmetic expression
so now if you execute this query for the
first record you can see that their
point will end up being 2 2 8 3 let's
run the query one more time there you go
now we can put the original points
column here for clarity some points
comma points plus 10 let's run the query
one more time now we can see the
original points and next to that you can
see the value that we're gonna use to
calculate the discount now here we're
using the plus operator which is for
addition we also have multiplication
division subtraction and modular which
is the remainder of the division so
let's change this to something more
complex let's say we want to get the
points multiplied by 10 and then add
hundred to it now you can immediately
see that this line 1 is getting too long
and it doesn't fit on the screen in
situations like this you can break up
the Select Clause by placing each column
on a new line so select last name then
first name points and finally points
times 10 plus 100 so let's execute this
query one more time so this is our new
column with the new calculated value now
one thing you need to understand in this
arithmetic expression is the order of
operators and this is based on the order
of operators in
so in math the multiplication and
division operators have higher order or
higher precedence than addition and
subtraction so in this expression first
points is multiplied by 10 and then the
result is added to a hundred like if
this is not what you want you can always
change the order by using parentheses as
an example let's change this
multiplication to addition and then put
that multiplication here in this
expression first ten is multiplied by
100 and then the result is added to the
point now let's say this is not what we
want so we can change the order by using
parentheses here with this parentheses
first
we get the points attend to them and
then multiply the result by 100 so these
parentheses are useful for changing the
order of operations as well as adding
clarity to our code so someone else
reading this code can easily understand
the order of these operations now let's
execute this query one more time all
right now look at the name of this
column here it's said to the expression
that we have on line 5 that doesn't
quite make sense we want to have a clear
descriptive name so we can give this
column and alias using the as keyword so
as and then we give it a name like
discount discount underline factor let's
run the query again now the name of this
column is changed so this is the benefit
of using an alias we can give
descriptive names to the columns and the
result set now if you don't have a space
in the column name you need to surround
it with quotes either single or double
quotes so you put quotes here and then
we can add a space in between these two
words let's execute the query one more
time now we've got discount factor so
let's quickly recap everything you learn
about the Select Clause we can use an
asterisk to return all the columns or we
can explicitly specify the columns that
you want to return we can also use
arrays math expressions here and
optionally we can give an alias to each
column
the results set now there is one more
thing you need to know about the select
clause so let's delete this query and
select the state column from the
customers table
take a look these are the states in
which our customers are located now
currently in the sample data we don't
have any duplicates in other words we
don't have multiple customers in any of
these states but for this demo I want to
change the state of the first customer
to Virginia so we end up with duplicates
in the result set so let's open up the
navigator panel here's our customers
table let's look at all the data and
here's our first customer as you can see
it's located in the state of
Massachusetts now I want to change this
to Virginia so double-click VA for
Virginia enter done now on the bottom
right corner of the screen you should
see two buttons apply and revert
unfortunately I cannot show you these
buttons because the recording window is
a bit smaller and MySQL workbench but
look down the bottom in the bottom right
corner click on apply you're going to
see a dialog box like this asking you to
review the changes so go ahead and click
the apply button one more time all right
beautiful now let's go back to our first
query window and execute this query one
more time as you can see the first two
customers are located in Virginia what
if you want to get the unique list of
states and the result set that's when we
use the distinct keyword so select
distinct state with this query we'll
retrieve the unique list of states from
the customers table so with a distinct
keyword we can remove the duplicates
let's execute the query one more time
now we can see Virginia is not
duplicated
you
all right here's an exercise for you I
want you to write a sequel query to
return all the products in our database
in the results set
I want to see three columns named unit
price and a new column called new price
which is based on this expression unit
price times 1.1 so let's say we want to
increase the price of each product by
10% with this query we want to get all
the products the original price and
their new price so pause the video and
spend one or two minutes on this
exercise when you're done come back see
my solution
all right this is pretty easy so we
start with select now what columns do we
want to select name unit underline price
and then here we're gonna use an
arithmetic expression to calculate a new
price so we type out unit price times
one point one I didn't give it an alias
so as new underlined price or we could
put this in quotes and put a space with
a new and price now where do we want to
select this columns from from the
products table so from products note
that I've used uppercase characters for
all the sequel keywords and lowercase
characters for everything else so let's
go ahead and execute this query this is
what we get so these are all the
products you can see their original
price as well as the new price which is
10% more expensive in this tutorial
we're gonna look at the where clause in
sequel so earlier I told you that we use
the where clause to filter data for
example let's say we only want to get
the customers with points greater than
3000 so here in the where clause we can
type out a condition like this points
greater than 3000 when we execute this
query the query execution engine in
MySQL is going to iterate over all the
customers in the customers table for
each customer is going to evaluate this
condition if this condition is true it
will return that customer in the result
set so let's go ahead and execute this
and here's the result as you can see we
have only two customers with points
greater than 3000 so this is what we
call the greater than operator which is
one of the comparison operators in
sequel let me show you the complete list
of comparison operators so we have
greater than greater than or equal to we
have less than less than or equal to
here's the Equality operator and for not
equality we can use an exclamation
followed by an equal sign or something
like this so both these are
not equal operators let me show you a
few examples of these operators so I'm
gonna delete all this and bring back the
previous query let's say we want to get
only the customers in the state of
Virginia so we can change our condition
to something like this where state
equals Virginia note that up with
Virginia in quotes because this is what
we call a string a string is a sequence
of characters so whenever you're dealing
with a sequence of characters or
basically textual data you need to
enclose your values with either single
or double quotes but quite often by
convention we use single quotes so let's
execute this query and here's the result
you can see we only have these two
customers with ID one and two who are
located in Virginia and it doesn't
matter if we use uppercase or lowercase
characters so if we type out
VA in lowercase and execute the query we
get the exact same result now what if
you want to get all the customers
outside of the state of Virginia we can
use the not equal operator so we can
either prefix this with an exclamation
or use this other notation either way we
get the same result so these are the
customers that are not located in
Virginia now we can use this comparison
operators we date values as well for
example let's say we want to get only
the customers born after January 1st
1990 so we change our condition to birth
date greater than once again we use
quotes for representing date values even
though dates are actually not strings
but in the sequel language we should
enclose dates with quote so here we type
out 1990 - 0 1 for January - 0 1 for day
so this is the standard or the default
format for representing dates in MySQL
for digits for the year two digits for
the month and two digits for the day so
let's go ahead and execute this query I
actually made a mistake here so we don't
see the result instead we see the action
output or
the output window if you scroll to the
bottom you can see the details of the
error so here I used the wrong name for
the column we should separate these two
words with an underscore that is the
name of our column so let's execute the
query one more time so we only have
three customers born after January 1st
1990 so these were examples of
comparison operators in sequel in the
next tutorial I'm gonna show you how to
combine multiple conditions when
filtering data
all right here's your exercise I want
you to write a query to get the orders
that are placed this year so look at the
orders table see what columns do we have
there and based on that write to query
with a where clause
so here's the orders table in this table
we have this column order date we can
use this column to see the orders that
are placed this year so here's our query
select star from orders where order
underline date is greater than or equal
to January 1st 2019 assuming this is the
current here so 2019 0 1 0 1
now since currently we are in the Year
2019 this query will return all the
orders placed this year but next year
this query is not going to give us the
right result but don't worry about it
later in the course I will show you how
to write a query to get the orders
placed in the current year so for the
purpose of this exercise this is a valid
solution now let's execute this query
and see what we get so we have only one
order or their ID one that is placed and
the current here in this tutorial I'm
going to show you how to combine
multiple search conditions when
filtering data so let's say we want to
get all the customers that are born
after January 1st 1990 who also happened
to have more than a thousand points so
this is where we use the + operator so
we type out ant and after we type out
another condition like points greater
than a thousand now when we execute this
query will only get customers who have
both these conditions let's take a look
so execute we only have two customers
and if you look both these people are
born after in 1990 and they have more
than a thousand points so this is the
and operator when we use this operator
both these conditions should be true in
contrast to the end operator we have the
or operator so with or if at least one
of these conditions is true that row
will be returned in the result set
let's take a look now we execute this
query again instead of 2 records we have
quite a few records so for example we
have this person who is not born after
1990 but if you look at their points
they have more than a thousand points so
any custom
records that satisfies at least one of
these conditions will be returned now
let's take this to the next level let's
say we want to get customers who are
either born after 1919 or they should
have at least a thousand points and live
in Virginia so this is how we do this we
type out and and then we add another
condition state equals Virginia let's
execute this query and see what we get
we only get four records so these are
the customers that are born either after
1990 or they have more than 1,000 points
and live in Virginia if you look at the
first customer here this person is not
born after 1990 but you can see that she
lives in Virginia and she has more than
a thousand points so the last two
conditions are true for this customer
now when combining multiple logical
operators you need to be aware of the
order of these operators so earlier I
talked about the order of arithmetic
operators I told you that multiplication
have a higher order than addition and
subtraction and we can use parentheses
to override the default order we have
the same concept in logical operators so
the and operator is always evaluated
first so when this quiz executed the
query execution engine first evaluates
its condition because here we're using
an ant it doesn't matter that we typed
out this condition after the first
condition because the and operator has a
higher precedence but you can always
change the order using parentheses and
this also makes your code cleaner and
easier to understand so here we can put
parentheses around these last two
conditions and also we can put these on
a new line for clarity something like
this so anyone who reads this code can
easy to understand what is the intent of
this query now we also have another
logical operator and called not and we
use that to negate a condition let me
show you so I'm going to simplify our
word Clause let's say we're searching
for customers who were born after 1990
or they have more than a thousand points
if you execute this query we get these
people customers with ID 1 3 5 and so on
now we can use the not operator to
negate this condition so we apply not
here and preferably we also put
parentheses around this condition now
when we execute this query we'll see
other customers that are not and the
current result set let's take a look so
instead of customers with IDs 1 3 5 6
and so on we get the customers with IDs
2 4 and 10 now technically these
customers were born before 1990 and they
have less than a thousand points so if
you look here this first customer was
born before 1990 and he has less than a
thousand point how did I know that let
me show you a trick that I learned in
math whenever you have a not operator
you can simplify your expression like
this we apply the not operator to the
first condition people who were born
after 1990 how can we negate this
condition well the greater than operator
becomes less than or equal to that is
the inverse of that condition right now
we apply the not to or to negate the or
what do we get we get and finally apply
the not operator on the last condition
people who have more than a thousand
points when we negate this condition we
get customers with less than or equal to
a thousand points now we can remove the
not operator to simplify this we don't
need parentheses anymore because we only
have two conditions that are combined
with an add here is a result as you can
see this is much easier to read and
understand people who were born before
this date and they have less than a
thousand points
our taser exercise from the order items
table get the items for order number six
where the total price for that item is
greater than 30
all right here's the order items table
in this table we have these columns
order ID
product ID quantity and unit price if we
multiply the quantity by unit price we
can get the total cost of that item and
then we can compare it with 30 so let's
go ahead and write this query select
star from order items we're here we need
two conditions one is for the order so
order I'm gonna ID should be 6 and the
second condition we want to calculate
the total price so we get the unit price
multiplied it by quantity and this value
should be greater than 30 so as we can
see we can use an arithmetic expression
in a where clause it's not limited to
the select clause okay now let's execute
this query and see what we get
we should get only one item that is for
product one here the quantity is four
and unit price is just over eight
dollars so the total price for this item
is greater than 30
hey guys maash here in case you haven't
seen my website yet head over to code
with mass comm this is my coding school
where you can find plenty of courses on
web and mobile application development
in fact recently I published a complete
sequel course that is about ten hours
long and it teaches you everything you
need to know from the basic to the
advanced topics such as database design
security writing complex queries
transactions events and much much more
these are the topics that every software
engineer must master this YouTube course
you've been watching is the first three
hours of my complete sequel course that
is about ten hours long so if you want
to master sequel and get job ready I
highly encourage you to enroll in my
complete sequel course you can watch it
anytime anywhere as many times as you
want you can watch it online or download
the videos the course comes with a
30-day money-back guarantee and a
certificate of completion that you can
add to your resume the price for this
course is one hundred and forty nine
dollars but the first two hundred
students can get it for just over ten
dollars so if you're interested the link
is below this video in this tutorial I'm
gonna show you how to use the in
operator in sequel so as an example
let's say we want to get the customers
that are located in Virginia or Florida
or Georgia one way to write this query
is like this so we're state equals
Virginia or state equals Georgia or
state equals Florida now people who are
new to the sequel language or
programming in general find this
expression a little bit strange they ask
Marsh what can't we write this
expression like this where state equals
Virginia or Georgia or Florida here is
the reason we use the or operator to
combine multiple conditions so here we
have a condition or an expression more
accurately but on the right side of this
or operator we have a string in sequel
we cannot combine a string with a
boolean expression that produces a bully
value which can be true or false so that
is why we have to write or query like
this so we have multiple expressions or
multiple conditions and we're combining
them using the or operator okay so now
if we execute this query we get these
customers here but there is a shorter
and cleaner way to get the same result
instead of combining multiple conditions
using the or operator we can use the in
operator so where state is in and then
in parenthesis we add all the values
like Virginia comma Florida comma
Georgia and the order doesn't matter
this query is exactly equivalent to what
we had earlier but as you can see it's
shorter and easier to understand so
let's execute it look we get the exact
same result now here we can also use the
not operator let's say we want to get
the customers outside of these states so
we can use where state not in this list
now if you execute this query we get
customers who are located in Colorado
takes us and so on so use the in
operator when you want to compare an
attribute with a list of values
now here is your exercise I want you to
write a query to get the products where
their quantity in stock equals to one of
these values 49:38 and 72 so pause the
video do this exercise and then come
back continue watching
all right this is pretty easy so we do a
select star to get all the columns from
the products table where quantity in
stock in we use the in operator to
compare this attribute with these values
49:38 and 72 let's execute the query we
get only two records because we don't
have a product with quantity in stock
equal to 72
in this tutorial we're gonna look at the
between operator in sequa so let's say
we want to get the customers who have
more than a thousand and less than 3,000
points what made you write this query is
like this where points greater than
thousand well more accurately greater
than or equal to a thousand and points
less than or equal to three thousand
when we execute this query we get how
many we get four people that satisfy
this criteria now whenever you're
comparing an attribute with a range of
values you can use the between operator
and this makes your code shorter and
cleaner so we can rewrite this
expression like this where points
between thousand and three thousand this
is exactly equivalent to what we had
before so these range values are also
inclusive that means point is going to
be greater than or equal to a thousand
or less than or equal to three thousand
let's execute the query we get the exact
same result
alright now as an exercise I wanted to
write a query to get the customers that
are born between January 1st 1990 and
January 1st 2000
you
all right so we start with select star
from customers where verse on the line
date between so what matters here is
that we can use the between operator for
date values as well it's not limited to
using numbers so we're birthdate between
now we need to supply to date values so
as I told you before the format for
dates is four digits for the year so
1990 two digits for the months and two
digits for the day so the birthday
should be between this value and here's
the second value 2000 0 1 and 0 1 let's
execute this query we got only three
people who match this criteria in this
tutorial I'm gonna show you how to
retrieve rows that match a specific
string pattern for example let's say we
only want to get the customers whose
last name start with B so here in the
where clause we type out where last name
this is where we use the like operator
and right after that we add a string
pattern so you want to get the customers
whose last name start with B and we have
any number of characters after B so use
the percent sign to indicate any number
of characters you might have one
character after B or no characters or 10
characters with this pattern we get all
the customers whose last name start with
B and also it doesn't matter if it's an
uppercase or lowercase B so let's
execute this query there you go so we
only have three customers whose last
name start with B as another example
let's say we only want to get the
customers whose last names start with
brush so we change our pattern to brush
percent now let's execute the query we
only get this one customer here now this
% doesn't have to be at the end of the
pattern it can't be anywhere for example
let's say we want to search for
customers who have it B in their last
name whether it's at the beginning in
the middle or at the end so we change
our
- % b % this pattern means we can have
any number of characters before or after
b let's execute the query these are the
customers who have a be somewhere and
their last name it doesn't matter if
being is at the beginning or in the
middle or at the end let's look at
another example i want to get all the
customers whose last name and with y so
here's the pattern we use let's execute
this query and we have five customers
whose last name and with a y so this is
how we use the % now we also have an
underscore and that matches a single
character so with this pattern we get
customers whose last name is exactly two
characters long we don't care what the
first character is but the second
character should be y let's execute this
query obviously we don't have any
customers whose last name matches this
pattern but if it changed this pattern
to five underscores so one two three
four five followed by a why we should
get these customers so their last name
is exactly six characters we don't care
about the first five characters but all
of them and wit of y now as another
example we can replace the first
underscore with b and that means we want
to get the customers whose last name
start with me and after we have exactly
four characters followed by FY let's
execute this query so we only have one
customer that matches this pattern so
this is how we use the like operator we
use the percent sign to represent any
number of characters and an underscore
to present a single character now this
like operator in mysql is an older
operator but we also have a newer one
that is more powerful and it allows us
to search for any string patterns and
that's what I'm going to show you next
all right here I'm gonna give you two
exercises for the like operator first I
want you to get the customers whose
addresses contain trade or Avenue annex
I want you to get the customers whose
phone numbers and with nine
you
alright let's get started with the first
exercise so select star from customers
wear a dress like like hey we want to
use a search pattern like this you want
to have trail but trade can be anywhere
in the address so we put a percent
before and after trail next we should
use the or operator to search for
another pattern or a dress like let me
put this on a new line that is better a
dress like once again percent Avenue
percent that's it so let's execute this
Quay
here's the result you should get the
customers with IDs 2 9 and 10 if you
look at their addresses all of them have
either train or Avenue and their address
now let's work on the second exercise we
want to get the customers whose phone
numbers and with night that is pretty
easy so let me change our where clause
where phone once again we use the like
operator at a percent followed by and
nine that's all you had to do let's
execute the query so here's the result
customers with IDs three and seven their
phone numbers and midnight so this is
how we use the like operator and by the
way you can always use the not operator
here let's say if you want to get the
customers whose phone numbers don't end
with nine so we simply prefix like with
not now if we execute this query one
more time we get all the other customers
and the database
in the last tutorial you learn about the
like operator in sequel so as another
example let's say we want to search for
the customers who have the word field in
their last name so we type out a where
clause like this where last name like %
field % so the word field can be
anywhere in the last name let's execute
this query we get only one customer
beautiful now we also have another
operator in MySQL that is reg X which is
short for regular expression and regular
expressions are extremely powerful when
it comes to searching for Strings so
they allow us to search for more complex
patterns here's an example if I want to
rewrite this last where clause using a
regular expression it looks like this
where last name are AG exp now hitting
our string pattern we don't have to type
out the percent signs we only type out
field so what we have on line 4 is
exactly identical to what we have on
line 3 let's execute this query we get
the same result beautiful now here in
regular expressions we have additional
characters that we don't have when we
use the like operator for example we can
use the caret sign to indicate the
beginning of a string so if I put a
caret just before the word filled that
means our last name must start with
field obviously if we execute this query
we don't get any one that matches this
criteria so we use the caret sign to
present the beginning of a string we
also have a dollar sign to represent the
end of a string so this pattern means
the last name must end with field let's
execute this query we get the same
result as before now we can also search
for multiple words here for example
let's say we want to find the customers
who have the words filled or Mac in
their last name so we use a pipe a
vertical bar and type out another
pattern
let's execute this quay so here we have
two customers one of them has the word
Mack the other has the word filled in
their last name now we can take this to
the next level let's say we want to find
the customers who have the words filled
or match or rose in their last name
let's execute the query we get three
customers beautiful so we use a pipe or
a vertical bar to represent multiple
search patterns now as another example
we can change our first search pattern
to something like this now this pattern
means the last name should either start
with the word field or it should have
the word Mack in it or it should have
the word rose let's execute the query
now we get only two customers because
our customer with the last name brush
field doesn't match this pattern however
if we change our first pattern to field
dollar sign and execute the query we get
three people here three customers so
this is how we can combine multiple
special characters when building a
complex pattern now let's look at
another example let's say we want to
search for customers who have an e in
their last name so these are all the
people all right now let's say we want
to make sure that before the letter e we
should either have AG or an I so this is
where we use square brackets and inside
the brackets we add multiple characters
like G I M and that matches any
customers who have GE or ie or M II in
their last name so any of these
characters can come before e now let's
execute this query there you go we only
get two customers in the first example
before e we have AI which is one of the
characters inside the brackets in the
second example before E we have a G
which is also another valid character
before e now once again the square
brackets don't have to be before E we
could add them after E so any customers
who have ephod buy an F or an M or a Q
in their last name
can be returned with this pattern
obviously we don't have anyone in the
database so this is how we use square
brackets now we can also supply a range
of characters for example we can have e
and just before if you want to have any
characters from a to H we don't have to
type them out explicitly like ABCD efg
that's very verbose so we can type out a
to H and now if you execute this query
we get these three people so let's
quickly recap everything you learn about
regular expressions in this tutorial we
use a carrot to present the beginning of
a string so beginning we use a dollar
sign to represent the end of a string we
use a vertical bar or a pipe to
represent a logical or so we can supply
multiple search patterns we use square
brackets to match any single characters
listed in the brackets and finally we
use square brackets with a hyphen to
present a range so any characters from a
to let's say F but technically my school
supports more special characters but
quite honestly the ones that I've listed
in this tutorial are the ones that
you'll be using 90% of the time so just
memorize these ad you're good to go
quite honestly a lot of beginners find
the syntax for regular expressions
confusing so in this video I'm gonna
give you four exercises that I have
carefully designed to help you quickly
learn about this syntax
here's the first exercise get the
customers whose first names are Elka or
amber I note that this is amber with a u
now for the second exercise return the
customers whose last names and with E Y
or o n here's the third exercise get the
customers whose last names start with my
or it contains s E and finally as the
last exercise return the customers whose
last names contain be followed by R or
you so go ahead and spend 2 to 3 minutes
on this exercise when you're done come
back continue watching
you
all right let's knock out the first
exercise so we want to get all whoops
there's a see here select star from
customers we're first name regular
expression and here's our pattern we
want to search for two words either Elka
or amber
simple as that let's execute this query
we should get two customers there you go
amber and Elka all right now let's knock
out the second exercise so I'm gonna
delete this we don't need it anymore so
we want to get the customers select star
from customers where last name should
end with either a Y or Oh n so in the
search pattern we type out ey followed
by a dollar sign to indicate the end of
your string then we had a vertical bar
to supply the second search pattern so o
N and once again a dollar sign let's
execute this query oops actually I
forgot to type out regular expression
there you go so let's execute this query
and we should get these for customers
with IDs one three five and seven the
first three their last names and with E
Y and the last customer his or her last
name ends with Oh n all right now let's
work on the third exercise so I'm just
gonna change the regular expression here
we want to get the customers whose last
name starts with my or contains se so we
use a carrot to indicate the beginning
of our string so it should start with my
or it should contain as e again very
easy let's execute this query and we get
the customers with IDs four eight and
ten and finally we want to get the
customers whose last names contain B so
let's change the search pattern we
should have a be followed by our or you
now there are two ways to write this
regular expression we can use square
brackets so we have be followed by our
or you that's one way the other way is
to use a vertical bar so BR or bu these
are both valid solutions so I hope you
knocked out these exercises in the next
tutorial I'm gonna show you how to get
the records with missing values
in this tutorial I'm gonna show you how
to look for records that Miss an
attribute for example if we select all
the customers in our database we can see
that the customer with ID 5 doesn't have
a phone number so if you look closely
here you can see the value null null
means the absence of the value now let's
say we want to search for all the
customers who don't have a phone perhaps
you want to send them an email and say
hey your phone is missing in our system
so how can we get this customers that is
very easy we use the ease null operator
so in the where clause we type out where
phone is not now let's execute this
query we only get one customer who
doesn't have a phone now here we can
also use the not operator to get the
customers who do have a phone so we
change the condition to is not null
let's execute the query now in the query
results every customer does have a phone
number
for this exercise I wanted to write a
query to get the orders that are not
shipped yet this is a very useful query
that is used in a lot of real
applications for example let's say
you're an admin for an online shop you
want to see the orders that are not
shipped yet so you can follow them up so
write a query to get these orders
you
so here we have the orders table let's
have a quick look at the data in this
table alright so if you pay close
attention you see some of these orders
don't have a shipped date and these
orders also don't have a shipper ID
which is a unique number for identifying
the shippers so any order that misses a
value for the ship date or shipper ID is
considered an order that is not shipped
so let's go ahead and write a query to
get these orders so back to our query
editor select star from orders where
shipped underline date is no you could
also write shipper ID is no they're both
equally correct so let's execute this
query and we should get five orders or
there's one three four six and eight
in this tutorial I'm gonna show you how
to sort data in your sequel queries so
here we have a query to select all the
customers from the customers table if
you look at the query result you can see
that our customers are sorted by their
ID so we have customers 1 2 3 4 and so
on this is the default sort corner but
we can always change this using the
order by clause but first let me explain
why the customer ID column is the
default sort color so first I'm going to
open up the navigator panel on the left
side here is the customers table now
let's click on this middle icon here
that looks like a tool this opens up our
customers table in the design mode so
here we can change our columns we can
add new columns or remove existing ones
or change their name or order and so on
now if you pay close attention you can
see a yellow key just before customer ID
this means that this column is the
primary key column for this table so in
relational databases every table should
have a primary key column and the values
in that column should uniquely identify
the records in that table so back to our
query window we can see that the values
in this column uniquely identify each
customer so the customer ID column is
the primary key column in this table and
that is why when we write to query
against this table our customers are
sorted by their ID by default now let me
show you how to sort customers by a
different column so here in the order by
clause we type out the name of another
column like first thing let's execute
the query now you can see our customers
are no longer sorted by their ID instead
they're sorted by their first name in
ascending order now if you want to
reverse the sort order simply type out
de SC which is short for descending now
we are sorting this customers in
descending order ok we can also sort
data by multiple columns for example
let's say first we want to sort our
customers based on their state and then
we didn't each state you want to sort
them by their first name
so we type out multiple columns here
state and first name let's execute the
query now you can see that the first
state we have here is California
followed by Colorado and now here in
Florida we have two customers and these
customers are sorted by their first name
let's have a close look here so first we
have amber and then we have this other
customer here now we can also use the
descending argument anywhere here for
example we can sort these customers by
their state in descending order and then
sort them by their first name in
ascending order or once again in
descending order
so there are various ways we can sort
data now one of the differences between
MySQL and other database management
systems is that in MySQL we can sort
data by any columns whether that column
is in the Select clause or not for
example let's say we only want to select
the first and last name for each
customer now we can sort the result by
any columns in this table they don't
have to be first name and last name for
example we can sort them by their birth
date
take a look so this is a valid query in
my school but other database management
system sometimes you yell at you when
you write a query like this now we can
also sort data by an alias for example
here in our select clause let's add the
number 10 and give it an alias as let's
say points so points is not a valid
column in this table it's simply an
alias for an expression in this case a
simple number now here we could have a
complex mathematical expression it
doesn't really matter we can still sort
data by an alias so we can order by
points and then first name once again
this is a valid query from my skills
point of view now one last thing before
we finish this tutorial I've seen some
tutorials that teach you how to sort
data by column positions for example
here we can order by one and two and
that basically means sorted data by the
first name and then the last name so
these are the order of these columns if
you execute this query you can see that
our customers are sorted by their first
name and then
named wireless approach works it's
something that you should avoid because
if in the future you come back here and
add a new column in front of the first
name column let's say burst date now our
customers are no longer sorted in the
previous order so sorting data by column
positions produces unexpected results
and is something that you should avoid
instead always sort by column names like
first name
you
all right here's your exercise for this
tutorial in this database we have this
table called order items where we can
find the items for each order now I've
written a query that you cannot see here
because that's the solution to the
exercise I'm gonna give you that query
produces this result so we only have the
items for the order with ID 2 and we
have sorted these items based on the
total price for each item so the total
price for each item equals quantity
times unit price in this case the total
price for product 1 is just over $18 so
go ahead and write the query to select
all the items for order with ID 2 and
sort them by their total price in
descending order
you
alright let's select everything from
order items where order ID equals to
that returns all the items for this
order now I'm gonna make sure to sort
them by their total price so here in
order by clause we write an expression
quantity times unit price this returns
the total price for each item and then
we add the descending argument here so
once again the expression that we use in
the order by Clause doesn't have to be a
column name it can be an alias or an
arithmetic expression like this let's go
ahead and execute this query this is
what we get now for clarity I would like
to add another column and the result so
let's say quantity times unit underline
price but give it an alias like total
price let's execute the query we can
clearly see that this data is sorted by
the total price in descending order
however there is a bit of duplication in
our query we have repeated this
expression in two places so now we can
simplify our order by clause by using an
alias that is total price and we get the
exact same result next I'm gonna show
you how to limit the number of Records
returned from your queries
in this tutorial I'm gonna show you how
to limit the number of records returned
from your query for example when we
execute this query we get all the
customers and the customer table so we
have 10 customers here now what if you
only want to get the first three
customers that's where we use the limit
clause let me show you
so after from we type out limit 3 and
this will return only the first 3
customers now if the argument that we
pass here is greater than the number of
records other query produces we'll get
all the records in the query result for
example if I pass 300 here obviously we
don't have 300 customers in this table
so when we execute this query we'll get
all the 10 customers in this table so
this is how the limit Clause works now
here we can optionally supply an offset
and this is very useful in situations
where we want to paginate the data for
example let's say we have a website and
on this website we have a web page for
the user to see all the customers in a
database now for simplicity let's
imagine you want to show only three
customers per page so what are the
customers that we're gonna have on page
1 we're gonna have customers 1 2 3 on
page 2 we're gonna have customers 4 5 6
and on page 3 we're gonna have customers
7 8 9 now let's say we want to write a
query to retrieve the customers on page
3 how can we do that well we want to
skip the first 6 records and then pick 3
records right so we change our limit
clause to something like this limit 6 &
so six is what we call an offset and
that basically tells MySQL to skip the
first six records and then pick three
records let's execute this query all
right now we get customers seven eight
and nine
you
now for your exercise I want you to get
the top three loyal customers these are
the customers that have more points than
everyone else
you
all right first we select everything
from the customers table now we need to
order these customers by their points in
descending order so if you look at the
query result you can see that customers
are sorted by their loyalty so the most
loyal customers come first now we want
to pick only the first three customers
and that's where we use the limit clause
so limit 3 let's execute this query and
these are the most loyal customers
customers with IDs 5 6 & 3 now here's
one thing I want you to remember and
that is the order of the limit clause
the limit clause should always come at
the end so first we have a select clause
then we have from optionally we can have
where followed by order by and finally
limit the order of these clauses matters
if you change the order my sequel is
gonna yell at you so pay attention to
the order when writing your queries
so far we have only selected columns
from a single table but in the real
world we quit often select columns from
multiple tables and that's what I'm
gonna show you over the next few
tutorials so on the left side if you
look at our orders table let's select
all the data here in this table we're
using the customer ID column to identify
the customer that has placed each order
now as I told you before we don't store
customers information here like their
phone number their email their address
because this information can change in
the future and if a given customer has
placed multiple orders then we'll have
to come back and change multiple records
we don't want to do that that's why we
have separate tables for customers and
orders now in this tutorial I'm gonna
show you how to select the orders in the
orders table but instead of showing the
customer ID show the full name for each
customer so let's go back to our query
window alright so we want to select
everything from the orders table now we
should combine the columns in this table
with the columns in the customers table
that is where we use the join keyword
now here we can optionally type inner
join because in sequel we have two types
of join inner join and outer join we
look at outer joins later in this
section so for now we're only using an
inner join and this inner keyword is
actually optional so we don't have to
type it so you want to join the orders
table with the customers table now on
what basis do we want to join these
tables well here in the customers table
we have this customer ID column so if
you put these two tables next to each
other we want to line up the records
such that the customer IDs are equal
that is where we use the on phrase so
after on we type out a condition here is
a condition we need to type out orders
dot customer underlined ID should be
equal to customers dot customer ID now
this is getting outside of the screen so
let me break up this line that's better
so with this query we're telling MySQL
but hey whenever you're joining the
orders table with the customers table
make sure that the customer ID column in
the orders table equals the customer ID
column in the customers table now let's
execute this query look at the result
since we are selecting everything here
the first few columns are from the
orders table because we have listed that
first now after all the columns in the
orders table we have the columns in a
customer table so customer ID first name
last name and so on now let's simplify
the result set and select only order ID
first name and last name so back to our
query we select order ID first name and
last name now let's execute the query
that is better so next to each order ID
we can see the name of the customer that
placed that order now what if you want
to display the customer ID here as well
well let's put that here and see what
happens
customer ID execute the query we get an
error so if you look at the output
window down the bottom you should see an
error saying column customer ID in the
field list is ambiguous now
unfortunately I cannot show you this
error because the size of my recording
window is smaller than MySQL workbench
but that aside let me explain why we're
getting this error because we have this
customer ID column in both the orders
and customers tables so MySQL is not
sure which table do we want to select
this column from that is why it's saying
this column is ambiguous so we need to
qualify this column by prefixing it with
a table name we can either pick it from
the orders table or the customers table
it doesn't really matter because the
values are equal right so in situations
where you have the same column in
multiple tables you need to qualify them
by prefixing them with the name of their
table okay now almost execute the query
one more time so there you go we have
order ID customer ID and a full name
beautiful now one more thing before we
finish this tutorial if you pay close
attention we have repeated the word
orders in multiple places we have it
here as well as in the joint condition
the same is true about the customers
table we have repeated that here we can
get rid of this repetition and make our
code simpler by using an alias so right
after each table we can give it an
alias Oh as in short for orders so by
convention we abbreviate the tables name
now wherever we have orders we should
replace that with O so here in the joint
condition we replace orders with O and
also one more time and the Select Clause
there you go
we can also apply an alias for the
customers table we've got it see and
then we simplify our joint condition
like this so this is how we can join
columns from multiple tables
now for your exercise I want you to look
at the order items table so in this
table we have these columns or their ID
product ID quantity and unit price now I
want you to write a query and join this
table with the products table so for
each order return both the product ID as
well as its name followed by the
quantity and the unit price from the
order items table and by the way make
sure to use an alias to simplify your
code
you
alright first let's select everything
from the older items table and then join
it with the products table how are we
gonna join these tables on order under
line items dot well actually let's just
keep this an alias right away so we use
oh I as an abbreviation for order items
and P has a short for products so oh I
dot product ID should be equal to P or
products dot product ID and by the way
remember that when you give an alias to
a table you have to use that alias
everywhere else so here I cannot type
out products my school is gonna yell at
me so let's use the abbreviation alright
this is how we join these tables let's
execute this query up to this point
alright so we see all the items from the
order items table followed by the
columns from the products table now we
want to explicitly select a few columns
here so from the order items table we
want to select order under line ID well
technically we don't have to prefix this
with the table name because this column
is not repeated in multiple places so
it's not ambiguous so let's make the
code shorter that's better now we want
to select the product ID column but
because this column exists in both
tables you have to prefix it with a
table link either
oh I or P it doesn't really matter next
we want to select quantity and finally
unit price now actually here we have
this unit price column in both tables so
this is the unit price in order items
table and this is the unit price in the
products table now you might be curious
why we have this economy in two places
the reason for this is that the price of
products can change so for each order
item we want to have the price at the
time the user or the customer place the
order so this is a snapshot of the price
at a given point in time the unit price
that we have in the products table is
the current price right now this is very
important for reporting
otherwise we cannot calculate the sales
properly so because we have the unit
price column in two places in this case
we should pick it from the order items
table because this is the price at the
time of placing the order now let's
execute the query so here's the final
result
in the real world when you work as a
developer or a database administrator
quit often you will have to work with
multiple databases in this tutorial I'm
gonna show you how to combine columns
from tables across multiple databases
that's pretty easy so in the sequel
store database we have these tables that
you're fairly familiar with now imagine
this products table was not here now if
you look at the sequel inventory
database you can see here we have
another products table this products
table is exactly the same as the
products table that we have in a sequel
store database so it has the same
columns on the same data but technically
this is not a good design you don't have
the same table repeated in multiple
places but for this demo let's just
imagine that we don't have the products
table here so we want to join the order
items table with the products table in
the sequel inventory database let's get
started
so select everything from the order
items table let's give it an alias
straight away we want to join this with
the products table this products table
is part of the sequel inventory database
so we'll have to prefix this with the
name of its database so we type out
sequel inventory dot now once again we
can give this an alias like P then type
out our joint condition so oh I dot
product ID should be the same as P dot
product ID let's run the query there you
go so we successfully join tables across
multiple databases now note that we're
prefixing the products table with the
name of its database because the current
database that we're writing this query
against is the sequel store database
take a look in the Navigator panel the
sequel store database is displayed in
port because earlier we wrote the use
statement to select a database that was
sequel store now what if we select the
sequel inventory database let's see what
happens so sequel inventory now because
we have multiple
statements we have to terminate this
with a semicolon now we want to select
everything from the order items table
but we don't have this table inside of
this database so now we'll have to
prefix this table with a name of its
database that is sequel underline store
let's execute the query okay everything
works beautifully so here's the lesson
you only have to prefix the tables that
are not part of the current database in
other words your query will be different
depending on the current database
in sequel we can also join a table with
itself let me show you an example take a
look at this database sequel HR in this
database we have these two tables
employees and offices let's take a look
at the data in the employees table there
you go so here we have these columns
employee ID first name last name their
job title salary and reports - this is
the idea of the manager for this person
or this employee now once again we don't
want to repeat the manager's information
here like their phone number their
address because this information can
change in the future so we are only
using their identifier or their ID to
refer to them in this table now where
can we find the information about this
manager well this manager is actually an
employee of the same organization so
look at this example the manager IDs
three seven two seven zero now if you
look on the left side here's the idea of
that manager which is another employee
now who's the manager for this employee
let's take a look we don't have any
values here so the value for this cell
is no so this employee doesn't have a
manager and that means they are the CEO
so now let's go ahead and write a query
to join this table with itself so we can
select the name of each employee and
their manager back to a query window
first we need to select the sequel HR
database next we select everything from
the employees table we give them alias
like e now when it's join this table
with itself so once again we type out
employees but we need a different alias
what should we call this alias well we
want to join this table with itself so
we can find the managers right so we can
use M as in short for managers now this
type at our joint condition so from the
employees table we need to join the
reports under line to column to the
managers table which is basically the
employees table itself
and what column that is employee
underlined ID now let's execute this
query and see what we get so we see all
the columns from the employees table
repeated the first set of columns
represent information about the
employees and then after that we have
information about the manager in this
case we have only one manager in this
table but with this technique we can
easily create an organization chart we
can have a hierarchy of managers now
let's simplify our query and select only
the name of the employee and their
manager so back here since every column
in the employees table is repeated twice
we need to prefix each column with a
table name for example from the
employees table you want to get employee
ID as well as the first name and then
from the managers table you want to
select the first name as well so every
column should be prefixed with the table
name or more accurately the alias
because all these columns exist in two
tables right let's go ahead and execute
this query so this is what we get
employee ID first name and here's the
managers first name we can improve this
query by giving an alias to this column
because it doesn't make sense to have to
first name columns so let's give an
alias to the third column manager now
let's execute it one more time
and here's the end result so we have the
employee ID first name and manager so
joining a table with itself is pretty
much the same as joining a table with
another table the only difference is
that we have to use different aliases
and we have to prefix each column with
an alias this is what we call a self
join next I'm gonna show you how to join
more than two tables in this tutorial
I'm gonna show you how to join more than
two tables when writing a query for
example back to our sequel store
database look at the orders table now
you know how to write a query to join
this table with the customers table to
return information about the customer
who placed each order but here we also
have another column status which is
similar to the customer ID column so the
name of these statuses are not stored in
this table there are somewhere else in
the order statuses table let's have a
quick look here so our orders can be
their process shipped or delivered and
these are the identifiers for each of
these statuses now back to our orders
table in a status column we store the
order status ID so now we should write
the query to join the orders table with
two tables the customers table add order
statuses table the result of this query
is going to look like this so for each
order we see the order ID the date the
first and last name of the customer and
finally the status of the order this is
a beautiful report we can create for our
users so let me show you how to write
this query
back to our query editor first we need
to select the sequel store database now
we need to select everything from the
orders table let's give it an alias next
we need to join this with a customers
table on oh that customer ID should be a
cool to see that customer ID nothing new
so far exactly like before now here we
can write another join keyword to join
the orders table with order statuses
table so we type out order
statuses and also give it an alias like
OS what is our joint condition well I
can order stable here we have is status
column so the value in this column
should be equal to the order status ID
column in order statuses table right so
back to the query so orders table dot
status should be equal to order status
dot order status ID make sure to get the
name right don't have a typo otherwise
you're gonna get an error so this is how
we can join three tables now in the real
world as you work on more complex
problems you might end up joining even
ten tables so this is not uncommon in
the sequel world now let's go ahead and
execute this claim first we get the
columns from the orders table followed
by the columns from the customers table
and so on this result is so complex and
hard to extract information from so
let's explicitly select a few columns
here from the orders table we want to
select the order ID column as well as
the order date then from the customers
table we want to select the first name
and the last name and finally from the
order statuses table we want to select
the name column now we can give this an
alias like status that's better let's
execute the query one more time so
here's the end result we have order ID
or the date the name of the customer
followed by the status of the order
all right for your exercise take a look
at this equal invoicing database here we
have this table payments and these are
the payments that each client has made
towards a given invoice let's take a
look at the data so we have these
columns like client ID that identifies
the client so we can join this table
with the clients table to see the name
of the clients next we have invoice ID
you also have date amount and payment
method so similarly we can join this
table with the payment methods table
here let's have a look at a data in this
table these are the payment methods
credit card cash paypal and wire
transfer so back to the payments table I
want you to write the query and join
this table with the payment methods
table as well as the clients table
produce a report that shows the payment
with more details such as the name of
the client and the payment method
all right first we need to use the
sequel invoicing database now we can
select everything from the payments
table which we call P next we need to
join this with the clients table which
we call it C on P client ID should be
equal to C that client ID let me double
check the column name to make sure I got
it right so back to the payments table
the column is called
client ID you also have a column called
payment method that we should join to
the payment method ID column of the
payment methods table so back to the
query once again we use a joint
statement here join with payment methods
we give it an alias pm on P dot payment
underlying method should be equal to
p.m. dot payment method ID make sure to
type it out correctly otherwise you're
gonna get an error so let's go ahead and
execute the query after this point there
you go finally let's hand pick the
columns that make the most sense so from
the payments table let's select a date
followed by invoice ID
what else do we have here so we have
client ID invoice ID date amount and
payment method I'm gonna pick the amount
column from here as well so back to the
query P dot amount now we need to add
information about the client let's take
a look at this table clients so here we
have columns like name address city and
so on all we need here is the name
column so back to the query from the
clients table let's select the name
column and finally from the payment
method table let's select what is that
column called
it's called name so back to the query PM
dot name so here's the end result now we
can put these columns in any order that
we want it doesn't really matter let's
execute the query and make sure
everything works so honest
eight for this invoice we have in
payment for this amount by this client
using a credit card
in all the examples you have seen so far
we use a single column to uniquely
identify the rows in a given table for
example in the customers table we have
this customer ID column which uniquely
identifies the rows in this table but
there are times that we cannot use a
single column to uniquely identify
records in a given table for example
look at the order items table in this
table we have columns like order ID
Product ID and so on now if you look at
the data you can see that the values in
the order ID column are repeated or
duplicated we have two two two six six
and so on so we cannot use this column
on its own to uniquely identify each
record the same is true for the product
ID the values in this column are also
duplicated so in this table we use the
combination of the values in both these
columns to uniquely identify each order
item as an example in this order we have
three items for products 1 4 and 6 and
for each product we have the quantity
and unit price so if we use the
combination of the values in both these
columns we can uniquely identify each
order item in other words we don't have
two records for order ID 2 and product
ID 1 we only have a single record for
that item right now let us open this
table in the design mode so over here
click on this middle icon that looks
like a tool note that this yellow key
that represents the primary key exists
on both these columns this is what we
call a composite primary key a composite
primary key contains more than one color
now why does this matter well what do
you have a table with a composite
primary key you need to learn how to
join that table with other tables for
example here we have this table order
item notes that we use to keep notes for
each order item let's take a look at the
data here so we have this column note ID
which uniquely identifies the records in
this table next to that we have order ID
and Product ID you learn that the
combination of these two columns you
nuclear represent and order item so here
for order number two for product number
one we have two notes now let me show
you how to join this table with the
order items table so back to our query
you can see that I've already selected
the sequel store database so i'm not
gonna type out a use statement
alright let's select everything from the
order items table give it an alias now
we need to join this with order item
notes also we're giving an alias how are
we going to join these tables based on
two columns back to the order items
table these are the columns that we need
to use in our joint condition so in the
order items table we have this order ID
column this would be equal to the same
column in order item note table so oh I
am dot order ID but this is not enough
we should also join these tables based
on the product ID column so we type out
and and then we type out our second
condition so order items dot product ID
should be equal to order item notes dot
product ID this is what we call a
compound join condition so we have
multiple conditions to join these two
tables
in this tutorial I'm going to talk about
the implicit join syntax in MySQL so
here we have a basic inner join we're
selecting everything from the orders
table joining it with customers table on
orders the customer ID equal to
customers customer ID pretty basic there
is another way to write this query using
implicit join syntax let me show you how
that works so we select everything from
here we can type out multiple table
names so orders comma customers and we
can also give them an alias
so C and O and then we move this joint
condition to the where clause so I'm
going to copy this from here type out a
where clause and paste the condition
these two queries are equivalent what we
have here is called implicit join syntax
now even though MySQL supports the
syntax it's something that I suggest you
not to use because if you accidentally
forget to type out the where clause you
will get a cross join let me show you
what I mean so first I'm gonna delete
the first query and execute this so we
get 10 records because we have 10 orders
in this database so far so good but what
happens if you accidentally forget to
type out the where clause instead of 10
records we're gonna get probably 100
records because every record in the
order table is now joined with every
record in the customers table this is
what we call a cross string now later in
this section I'm gonna talk about cross
joins in more detail but what I want to
point out in this tutorial is that it's
better to use the explicit join syntax
so we use join because this syntax
forces you to type out the joint
condition if you simply join orders with
customers without typing the join
condition you're gonna get a syntax
error so to recap
be aware of the implicit join syntax but
write all your joints using the explicit
syntax
earlier in this section I told you that
in sequel we have two types of joints
inner joins and outer joins that's so
far you have only seen examples of inner
joins and I also told you that this
inner keyword is optional so whenever
you type out a join you're using an
inner join in this tutorial we're going
to look at outer joins and the problems
they solve so let's start by writing a
query that uses an inner join and then
we'll convert that inner join to an
outer join
so select everything from the customers
table join it with the orders table on
see that customer ID should be equal to
oh that customer ID pretty basic right
now for clarity let's pick a few columns
from these two tables so from the
customers table I want to pick customer
ID and first name and from the orders
table I want to pick order ID now
finally let's sort the result so we can
clearly see what we get so order by see
that customer ID let's execute this
query and see what we get so here's the
result for customer number two called
anus or Ines whatever we have two orders
order for and order seven similarly for
customer number five we have two orders
and so on now there is something missing
in this result we only see customers who
have an order in our system these are
customers two five six seven eight and
ten but if you look at the customers
table you can see that we have other
customers like customer number one
customer number three and so on now
currently we don't have any orders for
these customers and that's the reason we
don't see them in this result set but
what if you want to see all the
customers whether they have an order or
not that's when we use an outer join
let me show you how that works so back
to our query the reason we only saw
customers who have an order was because
of this join condition when joining
these two tables we are only returning
words that match this condition so for a
given customer if we do have an order
that record is returned but as you saw a
second ago some of our customers don't
have an order so for those customers
this condition is not valid and that is
the reason they are not returned in the
result set
to solve this problem we use an outer
join now in sequel we have two types of
outer joins we have left joints and
right joints when we use a left join all
the records from the left table in this
case customers are returned whether this
condition is true or not so we get all
the customers and if they do have an
order we'll see the order ID as well
let's execute this query and see what we
get
so there you go customer number one
doesn't have an order and that's why we
get null in this cell customer number
two has two orders four and seven
customer number three also doesn't have
an order so we have null for order ID
this is the result of a left joint so
back to our query when we use a left
join all the records from the left table
are returned whether this condition is
true or not now what if we use a right
joint in this case all the records from
the orders table are returned whether
this condition is true or not let's
execute this query and see what we get
so we get the same result as before when
we use an inner join because we're
selecting all the records from the right
table which is the orders table so we
don't see all the customers we see all
the orders right now if you want to use
a right join and still see all the
customers you need to swap the order of
these tables so we put the orders table
first that's gonna be our left table and
then we put the customers on the right
side so now with this query will return
all the records from the right table
which is the customers table let me
execute this we get all the customers
whether they have an order or not
beautiful now one last thing we finish
this tutorial I've seen developers use
the outer keyword
so either right outer join or left outer
join but technically the outer keyword
is optional just like the inner keyword
so you don't have to type it out so I'm
gonna remove this to make my code
shorter and easier to understand
so to recap if you use the join keyword
you're doing an inner join and if you do
a left or right join you're doing an
outer join
here's our exercise for this tutorial I
want you to write a query that produces
this result so we have three columns
here product ID name and quantity that I
picked from the order items table so
here we need to join the products table
with order items table so we can see how
many times each product is ordered
however if we do an inner join
we'll only see the products that have
been ordered but here I'm doing an outer
join so product number seven has never
been ordered but still exists in the
result we see no for the quantity so go
ahead and write an outer join to produce
this result
all right first we select everything
from the products table and then do a
left join with the order items table our
joint condition is P the Product ID
equals o ID product ID so because we're
using a left join we'll get all the
products in the products table whether
this condition is true or not if they
have never been ordered we still see
them in the result now let's pick a few
columns for clarity so P dot product ID
P name and oh I dot quantity that's it
let's execute the query we get the same
result as before so all the products are
here and product number seven has never
been ordered so we see null for the
quantity
similar to inner joins we can use outer
joins between multiple tables let me
show you so here's the query that we
wrote in the last tutorial you're doing
a left join between customers and orders
tables so when we execute this query we
get all the customers whether they have
an order or not if they have an order we
see the order ID beautiful now if you
look at the orders table you can see
that some of our orders have a shipper
ID these are the orders that have been
shipped so now let's join the orders
table with the shippers table to display
the name of the shipper in the result so
back to a query after this left join
let's write another join here I'm doing
an inner join so let's inner join
the orders table with the shippers table
join shippers we call it SH on what is
the join condition well oh that shipper
ID should be equal to SH that shipper ID
alright so in this query we have a left
outer join and an inner join let's see
what we get
alright we only see five records but we
have more orders so here we have the
same problem we had before several
orders don't have a shipper and that is
why they are not returned here in other
words this join condition is not true
for some other orders so back to the
orders table as an example this first
order doesn't have a shipper ship our ID
is null and that is why it's not
returned in the query result so to solve
this problem we should use a left join
you want to make sure that all orders
are returned whether they have a shipper
or not so back to the query we need to
replace this inner join with the left
join
so let's execute the query and see what
happens now we should have quite a few
more orders there you go now to make
this example more interesting I'm gonna
add the shipper name here so back to our
select clause let's add a new column so
shipper dot name and we can give it an
alias like shipper let's execute the
query and here's the result so we get
all the customers whether they have an
order or not and for those who do have
an order we get all the orders whether
they have a shipper or not this is the
power of outer joins now in the last
tutorial you learned that you can get
the same result with both a left join or
a right joint you just have to swap the
order of the tables however as a best
practice
avoid using right joints because when
you're joining multiple tables and you
have left and right and inner join
things get really complex someone else
reading your code will have difficulty
visualizing how you're joining these
tables as an example if you had a right
joint here and then a left joint after
it would be harder to visualize how
these tables are getting joined so as a
best practice avoid right joints and use
left joins instead
and here's your exercise for this
tutorial I want you to write a query
that produces this result so here we
have these columns order date order ID
the first name of the customer the
shaper and you can see that some of our
orders are not shipped yet so here we
have no and finally this status so go
ahead and spend 2 to 3 minutes on this
exercise when you're done come back
continue watching
alright let's select everything from the
orders table now we should join this
with customers on oh that customer ID
should be equal to see that customer ID
here I'm using an inner join because
every order does have a customer so this
condition is always valid it doesn't
matter if we use a left join or an inner
join here okay now if we're going any
further let's pick our columns so from
the orders table I want to pick order ID
followed by order date and then customer
dot first-name which we can optionally
rename to customer alright next we need
to select the shipper so we join the
result with the shippers table on order
that shipper ID equal to shipper that
shipper ID however if you use an inner
join here because some of our orders
don't have a shipper we're only going to
see the orders that have been shipped
let me show you so for clarity I'm gonna
add the shippers name here so shipper
and that name as shipper let's execute
the query there you go we only see the
orders that have been shipped but you
want to see all the orders right so we
need to change the second join to a left
join so all orders are returned whether
they have a shipper or not let's execute
the query one more time there you go now
we see all the orders from number one to
number ten beautiful finally way to add
the status column here so we need to do
another join here join with order
statuses which we abbreviate as OS on
all that status equal to AU s dot order
status ID you can see that I have
designed this database such that
sometimes our column names are exactly
identical but in other cases they don't
match so in the order table we call this
column status as opposed to order status
I D and this is deliberate because a lot
of real databases are like that all
right now let's add the status name here
so order status the name as status
execute the query and we can see all the
orders here for each order we have to
date the customer the shipper and the
status
earlier we're talking about self joins
in sequa so hearing the sequel HR
database we have this employees table
we wrote a query to get all the
employees and their manager so here we
have this column reports - that
specifies the manager for each employee
so let's go back and rewrite this query
to get all the employees and their
manager back to our query editor window
first let's use a sequel HR database
then select everything from the
employee's table
we give it an alias and then join it
with itself so this is what we call a
self join now we're gonna use a
different alias like M for managers now
what is the joint condition a dot
reports to should be equal to m dot
employee ID right now for clarity let's
pick only three columns so either the
employee ID e dot first-name and m dot
first-name which were renamed to manager
alright let's execute this query and see
what we get so here's the result as we
can see all these employees have the
same manager however there is something
missing here we don't have a record for
this person this manager himself so what
is missing is a record where we can see
the employee ID for this person their
name and their manager which should be
no because this person is the CEO or the
head of the company but why is this
happening the reason is our inner joy
because this condition we have here will
only return people who have a manager we
can solve this problem by using a left
join so we do a left join because we
want to get every employee in this table
whether they have a manager or not
ok now let's execute the query one more
time there you go now we have a record
for this person the manager as you can
see this person does not have a manager
that's why we have null here back to a
sequel store database here we have a
simple query that joins the orders table
with the customers table and here's our
joint condition you have seen several
examples of this before now as our
queries get more complex these joint
conditions get in the way they make our
queries hard to read but the good news
is that in MySQL we have a powerful
feature for simplifying his queries if
the column name is exactly the same
across these two tables we can replace
the on clause with a using clause which
is simpler and shorter let me show you
so I'm going to comment out this line
and instead type out using in
parentheses we type out the column name
that is customer ID what we have on line
seven is exactly identical to what we
have on line six but is shorter and
easier to read so let me delete this
line we can add another joint statement
here to join the orders for the shippers
so join with shippers
using shipper ID in both these tables we
have a column with the exact same name
alright now let's execute this query
this is what we get we have the order ID
followed by the first name of the
customer let's add a new column here so
I'm gonna add SH that name that is the
name of the shipper so our shipper now
obviously because some of our orders are
not shipped we need to replace this
inner join with a left join so we can
use the using keyboard with both inner
and outer joins let's execute the query
one more time there you go now we have
the name of the shipper next to each
order beautiful however we cannot use
this technique to join the result with
the order statuses table because in the
orders table we have this column called
status but in order statuses table this
column has a different name its order
status ID let me show you so order
statuses columns there you go order
status ID so the using keyword only
works if the column name is exactly the
same across different tables now what if
we have multiple columns in our joint
condition for example earlier we talked
about this order items table I told you
that in this table we have a composite
primary key which basically means a
primary key that consists of multiple
columns so the combination of these two
columns if uniquely identify each record
in this table now if you want to join
this table with order item note table in
our joint condition we should compare
both these columns with their
corresponding columns in the order item
note table so let's quickly write that
query and it's simplified with the using
keyword so select everything from order
items now join it with order item notes
on so here we need to compare oh I dot
order ID with who I end that order ID
and oh I dot product ID equal to or I n
dot product ID this joint condition is
kind of messy it's hard to read this
query now we can simplify this query
with the using keyword so we try it out
using in parentheses we add both columns
and separate them using a comma so order
ID and Product ID isn't that better
now for exercise back to our sequel
invoicing database write a query to
select the payment from the payments
table and produce something like this so
in this table we have a date the client
the amount and the payment method we can
see on what date who has paid how much
using what payment method
you
alright I'm gonna use that's equal
invoicing database and then select
everything from the payments table join
it with the clients table using client
ID because in both these tables we have
the client ID column next we need to
join this with payment methods however
the column name between these two tables
is different so in the payments table we
have a column called payment method but
in payment methods table our column is
called payment method ID so here we
cannot use the using keyword and we'll
have to use the on clause so on P dot
payment under line method equals P m dot
payment method ID now let's pick our
columns so payment that date client that
name and we rename this as client next
we pick the amount and finally the
payment method so let's rename that to
payment on the line method and execute
the query there you go this is what we
get the date the client the amount and
the payment method
in my skill we also have another simpler
way to join two tables it's called a
natural join and it's easier to code but
it's not something that I recommend
because sometimes it produces unexpected
results but let me quickly show you how
it works
in case you see it somewhere so at least
you're familiar with it so back to the
previous example let's select everything
from the orders table now we should do a
natural join with the customers table
now with this natural joins we don't
explicitly specify the column names so
the database engine will look at these
two tables I like to join them based on
the common columns the columns that have
the same name and that is the reason
this queries shortage right so for
clarity let's pick a couple of columns
here oh that order ID and CDOT let's say
first name let's execute the query there
you go so we see all the orders and the
customers will place them so natural
joins are really easy to code but they
can be a little bit dangerous because
we're letting the database engine figure
out or guess the join we don't have
control over it for this very reason
natural joints can produce unexpected
results and that's why I discourage you
to use them
in this tutorial we're going to look at
cross joins in sequa we use cross joins
to combine or join every record from the
first table with every record in the
second table here's an example let's
select everything from the customers
table now here we do a cross join with
the product table so every record in the
customers table will be combined with
every record and the products table and
that is why we don't have a condition
here okay so this is what we call a
cross join now for clarity let's pick a
couple of columns like see that first
name we rename it as customer and then
product the name which were renamed to
product also let's sort the result by
customer dot first name now let's
execute the query here's the result of a
cross join so first we have amber as the
customer and here are all the
combinations of amber with different
products next we have Barbara or
whatever it is and again we have the
combination of this customer with all
the products now in this particular
example it doesn't really make sense to
use a cross join a real example for
using cross joins is where you have a
table of sizes like small medium large
and a table of colors like red blue
green whatever and then you want to
combine all the sizes with all the
colors that is when you use a cross join
now what we have here is called the
explicit syntax for cross join we also
have the implicit syntax which looks
like this instead of typing out the
cross join which I pad multiple tables
in the front claws so customers and
orders both these queries produce the
same result but I personally prefer to
use the explicit syntax because it's
more clear
and here is a simple exercise for you do
a cross join between shippers and
products first do it using the implicit
syntax and then using the explicit
syntax it's pretty straightforward I
just want you to get your hands dirty in
the code and get used to this syntax
you
alright first I'm gonna use the implicit
syntax and then I will show you the
explicit syntax so let's start by
selecting everything from two tables
shippers and products now for clarity
let's pick two columns shipper that name
which we renamed to shipper and product
name which we renamed to product and
finally let's order everything by
shipper the name let's execute the query
this is what we get so the combination
of all shippers and all products
beautiful now let's use the explicit
syntax so we select everything from the
base table in this case shippers and
then do a cross join with products that
produces exactly the same result
we covered everything about joints you
learn that with joints we can combine
columns from multiple tables but in
sequel we can also combine rows from
multiple tables and this is extremely
powerful let me show you how that works
first let's have a quick look at our
orders table so select everything from
the orders table now if you look at the
data we can see that the first order was
placed in the current year 2019 all the
other orders were placed in previous
years now let's say we want to create a
report get all the orders are next to
each order add a label if the order is
placed in the current year the label is
going to be active and if the order was
placed in previous years we want to
label it as archived so let's change our
query and add a condition here first we
want to get all the orders in the
current here so we're order date is
greater than or equal to 2019 0 1 0 1 I
just want to highlight that this is not
the ideal way to get the orders in the
current year because here we have
hard-coded 2019 so if we execute this
query next year we're not gonna get the
right result but don't worry about this
for now later in the course I will show
you how to get the orders in the current
year without hard coding a date here so
let's execute this query now we get only
one order let's hand pick a couple of
columns here so order ID and order date
and also I want to add a string literal
here like active right let's execute
this query this is what we get we have
three columns order ID
order date and active and in this column
currently we have this string value
active now let's rename this column to
status and execute the query that is
better now we want to write another
query similar to this that will return
the orders in the previous years but
with a different label archive so to
save time
I'm gonna copy this V Alliance and paste
them right after our first select
statement now note that here we have a
syntax error because we didn't terminate
the first select statement with a
semicolon but don't worry about it we're
gonna get back to this in a second so
for the second query we want to return a
different label archive and you wanna
change our condition to less than 2019
now select only these few lines and
execute this query either by clicking on
this icon here or using the keyboard
shortcut that you learned earlier in the
course so there you go here are all the
orders from the previous years with the
label archive this query returns nine
records the previous query returned one
record now using the Union operator we
can combine data from these two queries
so in between our select statements we
type out Union now let's execute the
query one more time so here's our first
order in the current year that is active
and below that we have all the orders in
the previous years so using the Union
operator we can combine records from
multiple queries now in this example
both our queries are against the same
table but we can also have queries
against different tables and then
combine the result into one result set
let me show you another example so I'm
gonna delete everything here let's
select the first name from the customers
table and then we can union that with
select the name from the shippers table
let's execute the query so in one result
set we can see all the customers and all
the shippers as far as I know there is
no real word use case for this
particular query but what I want to
point out is that with Union you can
combine results from multiple queries
this queries can be against the same
table or different tables in your
database you could have a table like
archived orders and
another table like orders and then you
could combine all the archived and
active orders into one result set just
remember that the number of columns that
each query returns should be equal
otherwise you're going to get an error
for example let's select the first-name
and lastname from customers and then
Union that with the name of shippers let
me execute this query we'll get an error
because the first part of this query
returns two columns but the second part
returns one column so MySQL doesn't know
how to combine these records and one
last thing before we finish this
tutorial if you look at the result here
the name of this column is based on the
first Quay so the first query returns
first name and that's why this column is
called first name if we change the order
of this queries and move this Union up
here now let's run this query as you can
see our column is called
name so whatever we have in the first
query is used to determine the name of
these columns here we can also rename
the column to let's say full name there
you go
all right here's your exercise for this
tutorial write a query to produce this
report so here we have four columns
customer ID first name points and type
as you know we don't have this column in
the customers table so we have
calculated the values in this column
based on the points each customer has if
they have less than 2000 points their
type is bronze if they have between 2000
to 3000 points there are silver
customers and if they have more than
3000 points there are gold customers
also note that here we have sorted the
result by the first name so go ahead and
spend two minutes to write this Kuei
you
alright first let's get the bronze
customers so select everything from
customers where points is less than
2,000 now here we're gonna pick three
columns customer ID first name and
points and finally we add and you call
them with a string literal bronze let's
run this query and see what we get so
these are all the bronze customers but
the name of this column is bronze we
don't want that so let's rename this to
type now this is off the screen so I'm
gonna break this up into multiple lines
that makes our query cleaner and easier
to read so there you go let's run the
query one more time now the column is
called type beautiful now we should do a
union and repeat this query but extract
the silver customers so I'm gonna paste
this query here and then make a couple
of changes here I'm gonna replace bronze
with silver and change the condition to
between 2000 and 3000 let's run our
query and see what we get so we have all
the bronze customers first followed by
all the silver customers so the order of
these records are based on our queries
in our first query we got the bronze
customers that's why they are list at
first but this is not what we want we
want to order the result by the first
name of our customers so let's apply an
order by at the end so order by first
name now there is one more piece
remaining we should do a union one more
time and wait the query to get the gold
customers so I'm gonna select these few
lines and paste them here
now let's change silver to gold and the
condition two points greater than 3000
and finally we do an order by let's run
the query one more time and here's the
end result our customers are sorted by
their first name we see all the bronze
silver and gold customers
in the section I'm gonna teach you how
to insert update and delete data before
we get started let's have a closer look
at our customers table so click on this
middle icon to open this table in the
design mode what you see here might look
a little bit intimidating at first but
trust me this is actually so easy and in
this tutorial I'm gonna explain exactly
what we have in these columns so on the
left side you can see the column name
next to that you can see the data type
for each column so our customer ID
column can only accept integer values
integers are whole numbers like 1 2 3 4
and so on
they don't have decimal points first
name is a VAR char which is short for
variable character I hate in parentheses
you can see 50 that basically means in
this column we can have a maximum of 50
characters now if the name of a customer
is only 5 characters long we only store
those 5 characters so even though the
maximum length for this column is 15 we
are not gonna waste space if the
customers name is less than 50
characters that is why here we have 4
char which is short for variable in
contrast we have another data type that
is character if you had character 50
here and the name of the customer was
only 5 characters long my skill will
insert additional 45 spaces to fill this
column so this is a waste of space so as
a best practice most of the time we use
var char to store string or textual
values now here on the right side we
have this column PK which is short for
primary key so customer ID is marked as
the primary key and that is why we have
this yellow key here so the value is in
this column uniquely identify each
customer next to that we have an N which
is short for not null and that
determines if this column can accept
null values or not in this case
every customer record must have the
customer ID first name last name as well
as these other attributes but birthdate
and phone are optional so in these
columns we can have null values now we
have in
the column here AI which is short for
autoincrement
and this is often used with primary key
columns so every time we insert and you
record in this table we let MySQL or our
database engine insert a value in this
column so essentially it gets the
customer ID for the last row and it will
increment it by one at a time we insert
a new record so if you look at the data
you can see that currently we have only
ten customers here so if you had a new
customer here
MySQL will assign eleven to the new
customer okay and finally here we have
another column that specifies the
default value for each column for
example for our birthdate and phone
columns that default values are not so
if we don't supply a value my skill will
use the null values for these columns
similarly we have another default value
for the points column so if you don't
supply the points for a customer my
skill will use zero now we have a few
other columns here which are not
important at this stage you will learn
about them later in the course so now
that you understand the attributes of
each column in this table let's go ahead
and insert data into this table
in this tutorial you're gonna learn how
to insert a row into a table for that
we're gonna use the insert into
statement where are we going to insert
this row into the customers table so we
type out the name of the table here
followed by the values clause and here
in parentheses we supply the values for
every column in this table so back to
our table definition these are all the
columns first we need to supply a value
for the customer ID column however in
this column the auto increment attribute
is enabled and as I told you before if
we don't supply a value my skill will
generate a unique value for us so we can
go back to our statement and either
assign an explicit value or use default
to let MySQL take care of generating
this value this is the preferred
approach because if you use an explicit
value like 200 it is possible that you
might have another customer with the
same ID so when you execute this
statement you're gonna get an error
because you cannot have duplicate values
in this column every value should be
unique so here we're gonna use the
default keyword to let my SKU I'll
generate a unique value for the customer
ID now after that we need to supply a
value for the first-name and lastname
columns so let's say John Smith
note that I have enclosed these values
with quotes because as I told you before
in sequel we should always enclose
string and date values with quotes
either single or double quotes okay now
what else back to our customers table
after the last name we have the birth
date however as you can see this column
is optional because this check box is
not checked so here we can use null or
an explicit value null means the absence
of a value so back to our statement we
can type out a birth date like 1990
January 1st or we could use the null
keyword to leave out this value in this
demo I'm gonna use a valid date now to
make this code cleaner and more readable
I'm gonna break it up into multiple
lines that's better now back to our
table next we have phone and phone is
also optional because this check box is
not checked and known is the default
value for this caller so here we can
explicitly pass null or use the default
keyword and let MySQL put null into this
column it's exactly the same so back to
our statement we can pass null or
default both these key words will have
the same result in this case I'm gonna
use the null keyword all right let's
have one more look at our table next we
have 4 more columns that are required to
address city state and points I note
that point has the default value of 0 so
we can either use an explicit value like
200 or use the default keyboard and let
MySQL generate 0 so back to our
statement let's type out an address it
doesn't really matter
followed by a city and a state let's say
California and finally points again we
can use an explicit value or default so
this is how we can insert a row into a
table however in this example we're only
supplying values for first name last
name birth date and is address fields so
we're living out the phone number the
customer ID and
the points so there's another way to
write this statement and we'll show you
so after the table name we can
optionally supply the list of columns
that you want to insert values into in
this case first name last name birthdate
now once again I'm gonna break up the
statement into multiple lines so three
more columns address city and state so
these are the six columns that we're
going to supply values for with this
change we don't have to use is default
or null values we only supply values for
these columns so I'm going to remove
default from here then no and finally
this last default keyword
so this six values that we supplied here
are used for this six column now with
this change we can also reorder the
columns we don't have to list them in
the same order that they are defined in
the customers table for example we can
put the last name first and then
obviously we should also swap the order
of these values so we can list them in
any orders now let's execute the
statement now if you look at the output
window down the bottom you should see
the statement followed by one rows
effective unfortunately I cannot resize
this window to show you this message but
if you look down below you can see that
one record was affected which basically
means one record was inserted into this
table now let's look at the data in the
customers table so the last row is the
one that we inserted you can see that my
skill automatically generated the value
11 this is the effect of auto increment
attribute so it takes the value of the
last row and increments it by one so
here we have the first name last name
the birthday we didn't supply a value
for a phone attribute so that's why we
have null here we also have address city
state and the default value of zero for
the points
in this tutorial you're gonna learn how
to insert multiple rows in one go for
this demo we're gonna use this shippers
table let's have a quick look at the
table definition so here we have two
columns shipper ID a name shipper ID is
a primary key it's not nullable and it's
an auto incremented column so we're
gonna let MySQL generate values for this
column easy we only need to supply a
value for the name color soap actor Cory
editor window we type out insert into
shippers in parentheses we specify the
name of the columns we want to insert
values into in this case name followed
by the values clause here we add a pair
of parentheses with a value like shipper
1 now to insert multiple rows all you
have to do is to add a comma followed by
another pair of parentheses so cheaper
too and one more time comma parentheses
shipper 3 this is how you can insert
multiple rows in one go now let's
execute this statement alright and then
inspect the data in the shippers table
there you go so initially we had only
five shippers and here are the three new
shippers that we inserted note that my
SKU automatically generated the values
for the shipper ID column so we have 6 7
& 8
all right here's your exercise for this
tutorial write a statement to insert
three rows in the products table that's
pretty easy you can knock it out in a
minute
you
so here's our products table we only
have four columns we're gonna leave out
the first column because it's an auto
incremented column so we only have to
supply values for name quantity and unit
price back to our query editor window
let's insert into product the columns
are named quantity in stock and unit
price and the values are gonna be let's
say product one stock is gonna be ten
and the unit price is gonna be one point
ninety five now I'm gonna select these
values copy come up paste it like this
change the values accordingly and
finally the last row product three there
you go let's execute the statement all
right and then verify the result so in
the products table now we should have
three new records now the ideas you see
here are 15 16 and 17
because before recording this video I
actually inserted a few records in this
table
and then deleted them so I had product
IDs 11 12 13 and 14
now even though they're actually deleted
from this table my skilled remembers
their IDs so instead of incrementing 10
by 11 it incremented 14 which was the
last record from before and that's why I
generated 15 on your computer the IDS
are going to be 11 12 and 13
so far you have only learned how to
insert data into a single table in this
tutorial I'm going to show you how to
insert data into multiple tables here's
a really good example look at the orders
table what columns do we have here we
have the order ID we have the customer
ID so we know who has placed this order
we know the date of the order we know
the status comments as well as shipping
information but the actual items for
this order are not in this table they
are in the order items table so in this
table we have four columns we have the
order ID so we know what order this item
is for we have the product ID so we know
what product has been ordered at what
quantity and what price so an actual
order can have one or more order items
this is what we call a parent-child
relationship so in this relationship the
orders table is the parent and the order
items table is a child so one row in the
orders table can have one or more
children inside the order items table
now in this tutorial I'm going to show
you how to insert an order and all its
items so you will learn how to insert
data into multiple tables alright back
to our query editor window
first we need to insert the order so
insert in term let me close the
navigator panel alright you want to
insert a record into the orders table
now what columns do we have here so we
have these columns but only the first
four are required and actually the first
one we don't want to worry about that
because that's an auto increment column
so we only want to supply values for
customer ID order date and status so
back to our query we're specifying those
columns here customer ID order date and
status now let's apply the values in the
customer ID column we need to add a
valid customer ID so let's have a quick
look at our customers table there you go
in this table we have eleven records so
these are the valid customer IDs now
back to our query let's use one for
customer ID and then 2019 January the
second for the order date and one for
the order status once again in this
column we need to insert a valid order
status ID if we don't supply a valid ID
my skill is gonna yell at us so we
insert an order here now we need to
insert the items now back to our order
items table in this table we have this
order ID column so here's the tricky
part
as soon as we insert an order my skill
is going to generate an ID for our new
order now we need to be able to access
that ID in order to insert the items in
this table how can we do that well back
to a query editor window in my skill we
have a bunch of built-in functions and a
function is basically a piece of code
that we can reuse just like the
functions or features in your TV every
TV comes with a bunch of built-in
functions like power on power off change
the volume change the channel and so on
so MySQL and other database engines come
with a bunch of built-in functions that
we can use in our programs one of these
functions is last insert ID we can call
or execute this function by adding
parentheses here and this would return
the ID that mice cube generates when we
insert a new row so before going any
further let's just select this and make
sure we get the right result now we have
a syntax error here because we didn't
terminate the first statement with a
semicolon all right now let's execute
this query all right so the idea of the
new order is 12 let's verify that so
back to the orders table let's look at
the data on my machine I have 12 records
here I actually created one just before
recording this video so on your machine
you're gonna have 11 orders
now back to our query window now that we
know how to get the idea of the newly
inserted record we can use that ID to
insert the child records so we're going
to write another insert statement insert
into order items let's have another look
at the columns in this table so we have
four columns on all of them are required
so there is really no need to specify
the column names in our insert statement
we simply supply values for order ID
product ID quantity and unit price so
here in the values Clause we had
parentheses what is our order ID that is
the value returned from calling this
function so I'm going to cut this from
here and put it here next we need to
supply a valid product ID let's say
product 1 quantity let's say 1 and the
unit price to point $95
now let's delete this select we don't
really need it anymore and let's add
another set of values so once again
we're gonna call last insert ID to get
the idea of the new order we're gonna
change the product to product number 2
and at a different price that's it now
let's execute these statements and see
what we get alright so back to our
orders table let's refresh the records
here alright so we have a new order
order number 13 beautiful now let's look
at the order items table here's the
order items let's open the table so we
should have two items for order number
13 beautiful so this is how you insert
hierarchical data in MySQL
in this tutorial I'm going to show you
how to copy data from one table to
another for example in our orders table
currently we have about a dozen records
now let's say we want to create a copy
of this table called orders archive and
we want to insert every row that we have
in this table into that new table if you
have 10 orders we don't want to code an
insert statement with 10 set of values
that is very time-consuming so I'm going
to show you a powerful technique to
quickly copy data from one table to
another first we need to create this new
table orders archive for that we're
gonna use the create table as statement
so create table orders archived as now
right after that we write a select
statement to get everything from the
orders table now let's see what happens
when we execute this query there you go
so back in the Navigator panel we have
to refresh this view by clicking on this
icon over here now we have a new table
orders archive let's look at the data so
you can see all the orders are here and
we have the exact same columns as the
orders table however if you open this
table in the design mode you can see
that in this table we don't have a
primary key so the order ID column is
not marked as a primary key and also
it's not marked as an auto increment
column so when we create a table using
this technique my skill will ignore
these attributes and that means if you
want to explicitly insert a record into
this new table we have to supply a value
for order ID because this column is no
longer an auto increment column okay so
using Create table as statement you can
quickly create a copy of a table now we
refer to this select statement as a
sub-query so a sub-query is a select
statement that is part of another sequel
statement now we can also use a
sub-query in an insert statement and
that's a very powerful technique it
allows us to do really cool things let
me show you
so first let's right-click
the orders archive table and click on
truncate table because we want to delete
all the data in this table all right is
asking for confirmation
let's truncate the table so now back to
this table let's refresh the table we
don't have any records here ok now back
to a query editor let's say we want to
copy only a subset of records from the
orders table into this table like all
the orders placed before 2019 so first
let's select everything from the orders
table where order date is less than 20
19 January 1st so these are all the
orders orders number 2 to 10 beautiful
now we want to copy these orders into
the orders archive table so
we can use this select statement as a
sub-query in an insert statement we
write insert into orders archive now we
don't need to supply the column names
because we're gonna supply values for
every column that we have in this query
so we did it dad
and this is an example of using a select
statement as a sub query in an insert
statement let's execute this alright now
back to the table let's refresh the
records we only have the orders placed
before 2019
alright here's a really really really
cool exercise for you back to our sequel
invoicing database look at the invoices
table so in this table we have these
columns English ID number client ID
which is associated or related to the
client ID column in the clients table
followed by a few other columns now
let's say we want to create a copy of
the records in this table and put them
in a new table called invoices archive
however in that table instead of the
client ID column we want to have the
client name column so you need to join
the same ol with the clients table and
then use that query as a sub query in a
create table statement also to make the
exercise more interesting I want you to
copy only the invoices that do have a
payment so if you look over here this
payment date column determines if a
payment has been made towards this
invoice or not
so select only the invoices that do have
a payment date it's a really really good
exercise spend 2 to 3 minutes on this
and then come back continue watching
you
all right fair
I'm gonna use the sequel invoicing
database now let's select everything
from the invoices table and join it with
the clients table here I'm gonna use the
using statement to simplify my joint
what column are we gonna use for joining
the client ID column let's execute this
query up to this point alright so first
we see the client ID column that is used
for joining these tables after that we
have the columns from the invoices table
like invoice ID number and so on
followed by the columns from the clients
table like name address and so on
obviously we don't want all of these
columns we only need the columns from
the invoices table but we should replace
the client ID column with the client
name column so let's have a quick look
at the design of the invoices table here
we have invoices ID number client ID we
want to replace this column with the
client name so back to our query
I'm gonna pick a moist ID number and
then client that name let's rename it to
client what other columns do we have
here we have invoice total and payment
total so let's add those as well
invoice total as well as payment total
we also have three columns for dates
invoice date due date and payment date
so let me close the navigator panel
invoice date payment date and due date
now technically because these columns
only exist in the invoices table we
don't have to prefix them with a table
alias so we could simplify the code like
this however I personally prefer to
prefix them because that gives me a more
clear picture of how I'm joining these
tables it's just a personal preference
another developer might disagree and
that's perfectly fine so whatever you
prefer that's perfectly fine let's
execute the query and make sure we get
the right result so we have the invoice
ID number client beautiful followed by
these other columns now I'm going to
filter the result and return only the
invoices that do have a payment so we
can either return records that have a
payment date or the records that have a
payment total of greater than zero those
are perfectly fine so back to our query
down the bottom let's add a where clause
where payment date is not no that's
better let's execute the query one more
time now we get only this handful of
invoices beautiful finally let's use our
query as a sub query in a create table
as statement
so right before select we type create
table invoices archived as there you go
let's execute the Quai beautiful now
back to the Navigator panel let's
refresh the view so here's our new table
invoices archive let's look at the data
there you go we only have the invoices
paid and here's the name of the client
for each invoice beautiful now just note
that if you execute this query one more
time you're gonna get an error because
we already have a table called invoices
archive later in the course I'll show
you how to drop tables that's pretty
easy but for now you can just right
click and go to drop table and then
confirm all right and then you can run
the query in one more time
in this tutorial I'm going to show you
how to update data in sequa so back to
our invoices table look at the first
record here the payment total for this
record is zero and obviously there is no
payment date now let's imagine that
there was a problem in the system that
recorded this information let's say the
client paid $10 for this invoice so we
should update this record in this table
that is very easy back to our query
editor window we use the update
statement to update one or more records
in a table
what table in this case invoices next we
had the set clause and this is where we
specify the new value for one or more
columns in this case we want to update
payment total let's set it to $10 we
should also update payment date so we
use a comma to add more columns we set
this to a date value let's say 2019
March first and then we type out a
condition with this condition we
identified the record or the records
that need to be updated in this case we
want to update the invoice number one so
back to our query we type out invoice ID
equal to one let's execute this
beautiful now back to our table let's
refresh the data by clicking on this
icon all right you can see payment total
is updated to ten and we also have a
payment date beautiful now let's say we
actually updated the wrong record maybe
we should have updated in ways number
three so we should update this table one
more time and restore the original
values in this columns back to a query
we can set the payment total to zero and
the payment date to know so we can use
the null keyword to insert the null
value in a column that accepts null
values now back to the Navigator panel
let's open this table in the design mode
you can see that the payment total
column has a default value of zero and
the payment date column has the default
value of No
so back in our query we can also set
payment total to default and MySQL will
use the default value for this column
which is in this case zero so let's
execute this statement one more time
beautiful now back to the table let's
refresh the data so payment total is set
to zero and payment date is not
beautiful now let's go ahead and update
the third payment look at the invoice
total that is one hundred and
forty-seven dollars for this example
let's imagine that the client made fifty
percent of the total amount on the due
date so back to our query editor window
instead of using a literal value here
like seventy dollars we can write an
expression we want to calculate 50% of
invoice total so invoice total times 0.5
now let me break this code into multiple
lines so we can see clearly now we
should set the payment date as I told
you this client made the payment on the
due date so we can set this to Jew date
whatever value we have in this column
will be used to set the payment date and
obviously we need to update the invoice
ID number three now back in the table
let's refresh the data all right look
payment total is updated and it said to
almost 50 percent of the invoice total
however this number is truncated so we
don't have two digits after the decimal
point don't worry about it for now we'll
come back to this when we talk about
data types later in the course also you
can see that payment date is set to the
same value we have in the due date
column
in the last tutorial you learned how to
update a single record using the update
statement now if you want to update
multiple records the syntax is exactly
the same but the condition that you type
out here has to be more general for
example back to the invoices table you
can see that we have multiple invoices
for client number three we can write a
statement to update all the invoices for
this client so back to our query editor
window we change our condition to where
client ID equals to three however if you
execute this statement with MySQL
workbench which is the software we've
been using in this course you're gonna
get an error because by default MySQL
workbench runs in the safe update mode
so it allows you to update only a single
record you're not gonna have this
problem if you use another client for
MySQL or if you write this statement in
your application code this is only
specific to MySQL workbench now let me
show you how to get around this so on
the top we go to MySQL workbench menu
and then preferences on this dialog box
on the left side click on sequel editor
and then down the bottom untick this
check box save updates so this prevents
you from accidentally updating or
deleting a bunch of records in a table
so let's go ahead with this now we need
to reconnect to this instance of MySQL
so let's copy all the code here and
close this local instance window alright
now on the home page double click this
connection to reconnect there you go and
then paste all that sequel code now
let's execute this beautiful all the
invoices for client number three were
updated here we can also use the in
operator let's say we want to update all
the invoices for clients number three
and number four so all the operators you
learn to use in the where clause also
apply here now technically this where
Clause is optional so if you want to
update all the records in a table you
simply leave it out
you
our user exercise for this tutorial back
to our sequence to our database write
the sequel statement to give any
customers born before 1990 50 extra
points
you
alright first I'm gonna use sequel store
then write an update statement to update
the customers table set the points two
points plus 50 so here we are using an
expression to update the points column
for anyone born before 1990 so where
birth date is less than 1990 January
first
alright let's execute this query alright
now let's open up the customers table
one more time
so anyone who was born before 1990 now
has an extra 50 points
in this tutorial you're gonna learn how
to use sub-queries in an update
statement that's extremely powerful so
we're gonna continue with the example
from the last tutorial but we're gonna
make it more interesting here we're
updating all the invoices for client
number three but what if we don't have
the idea of a client you only have the
name for example imagine you have an
application and in that application the
user types in the name of the client so
first we should find the ID for that
client and then use that ID to update
all their invoices how do we do that
well let's have a quick look at our
clients table so here we have this
client my works let's say we have the
name we want to find the ID so back to
our query editor window after this
update statement I'm gonna write a
select statement to select the client ID
column from the clients table where name
equals my works now here we have a
syntax error because we didn't terminate
the last increment with a semicolon but
don't worry about that we're gonna get
back to that in a second let's just
select these few lines and execute this
query the idea of this client is too
beautiful now we can use this select
statement as a sub query in an update
statement so as I told you before a sub
query is a select statement that is
within another sequel statement so
instead of hard-coding
3 here we're gonna use this select
statement as a sub query but we need to
put it in parenthesis so MySQL will
execute this query first it will return
the client ID and then use it in this
condition
so for clarity let's remove the line
break and indent these few lines
so this is the end result now we execute
this query and this updated all the
invoices for this client now what if
this query returns multiple clients for
example back to the clients table let's
imagine we want to update the invoices
for all clients located in New York or
California so we need to update our sub
query like this where state in
California and New York
now before executing the entire
statement let's just select our sub
query and execute it to see what we get
so we get to client IDs 1 & 3 beautiful
now because this query this sub query
returns multiple records we cannot use
an equal sign here anymore so we need to
replace this with the in operator and
now this statement updates the invoices
for all clients located in these two
states let's execute it beautiful
everything worked so as a best practice
before executing your update statement
run your query to see what records
you're going to update so you don't
accidentally update the records that
shouldn't be updated now here we have a
sub query but even if it didn't have a
sub query you could still query the
records that we're going to update let
me show you so let's imagine we're going
to update all the invoices where payment
date is no before executing this entire
update statement I would run a query
like this select star from invoices
where payment date is not now let's
execute this query
these are the two records that don't
have a payment date so once we're
confident that we're updating the right
records then we come back here and get
rid of this select statement and just
attach the where clause to our update
statement
you
all right here's your exercise for this
tutorial
back to our sequel store database look
at the orders table as you can see in
some other orders don't have a comment I
want you to write a sequel statement to
update the comments for orders for
customers will have more than 3000
points so customers who have more than
3000 points regard them as gold
customers find their orders if they have
placed on order update the comments
column and set it to gold customer
that's a really good exercise
you
all right first we need to find the gold
customers so select everything from the
customers table where points is greater
than 3000 and by the way because the
current database is sequel invoicing we
either have to type out a use statement
on the top or double click this database
before executing this query so there you
go
we have three gold customers now we need
to get the idea of these customers to
use them in an update statement so we
only select customer ID here and then
use this select statement as a sub-query
and an update statement so update orders
set comments to gold customer where
customer ID because we're dealing with
multiple customer IDs we need to use the
in operator and then to use this as a
sub-query we need to enclose it in
parentheses that's it let's indent the
code that's better so here's the final
solution
so you have learn how to insert an
update data in this lecture we're gonna
finish this section by learning how to
delete data that is very easy we use the
delete from statement to delete records
from a table let's say the invoices
table now optionally we can add a search
condition to identify the records we
want to delete if you don't write this
where clause with this statement will
delete all the records in this table and
obviously that's very dangerous so be
very careful when executing the
statement now here let's say we want to
delete the invoice with the ID one so
where invoice ID it goes to one now here
we can also use sub-queries let's say we
want to delete all the invoices for the
client called my works first let's find
this client so select everything from
the clients table where name equals to
my works let's execute the second query
so here's our client now we can get this
client ID and use it in our search
condition so where client ID equals two
this is where we add our sub query there
you go
just like before beautiful so this is
how we can delete data in sequel
all right we're done with this section
but before going to the next section I
want you to restore all these databases
to their original state because in this
section we added some data we updated
some data with deleted some records so
if you don't restore these databases you
might see different results going
forward so restoring these databases is
pretty easy here in MySQL workbench on
the top go to the file menu and open
sequel script then navigate to the
directory where you stored the sequel
scripts for this course in case you lost
that directory go back to the first
section we have a lecture for
downloading the supplementary materials
so in this directory open create
databases sequel now execute this script
to recreate all of our databases all
right beautiful
now let's open up the navigator panel
you can see the databases disappeared
from here simply click on this refresh
icon beautiful all right we're done with
this section I will see you in the next
section
hey guys maash here in case you haven't
seen my website yet head over to code
with mass comm this is my coding school
where you can find plenty of courses on
web and mobile application development
in fact recently I published a complete
sequel course that is about ten hours
long and it teaches you everything you
need to know from the basic to the
advanced topics such as database design
security writing complex queries
transactions events and much much more
these are the topics that every software
engineer must master this YouTube course
you've been watching is the first three
hours of my complete sequel course that
is about ten hours long so if you want
to master sequel and get job ready I
highly encourage you to enroll in my
complete sequel course you can watch it
anytime anywhere as many times as you
want you can watch it online or download
the videos the course comes with a
30-day money-back guarantee and a
certificate of completion that you can
add to your resume the price for this
course is one hundred and forty nine
dollars but the first 200 students can
get it for just over ten dollars so if
you're interested the link is below this
video